M
*Esquire*
By John Sack

One, two, three at the most weeks and they would give M company its orders—they being those dim Olympian entities who reputedly threw cards into an IBM machine or into a hat to determine where each soldier in M would go next, which ones to stay there in the United States, which to live softly in Europe, and which to fight and to die in Vietnam.

No matter. What agonized M this evening wasn't what was in its cards but what was in the more immediate offing—an inspection! indeed, its very first inspection by its jazzy young Negro captain. So this evening M was in its white Army underwear waxing the floor of its barracks, shining its black combat boots, turning the barrels of its rifles inside out and picking the dust flecks off with tweezers, unscrewing its eardrums—the usual. The air was thick with the smell of floor wax and rifle oil, a moist aroma that now seemed to M to be woven into the very fabric of Army green. Minutes before, the company had heard a do-or-die exhortation by its bantamweight sergeant, Sergeant Milett. Get yourself clean for my sake, Milett had told M. "I've got a wife, three kids at home. I leave in the dark, I come home in the dark. I haven't talked to them in thirty-six hours. I don't know, maybe they're dead," using psychology, leaning against a two decker bed, reaching an arm through the iron bedstead, beseechingly. "Well …" making a joke of it, "I left them enough food, I shouldn't have to worry," and getting to the point, "I got a boss downstairs, he got a couple bars on his collar, he is the boss I work for. Tomorrow afternoon he will inspect us: don't make a jackass out of me!"

And all you've got to do is follow the chart! and M company, now in its fourth quick month of Army life and last of infantry training at a large and bleak Eastern camp, had known what Milett meant. The chart appeared in the Soldier's Handbook and it bore the enacting signature of the Army's adjutant general, none other. The insides of a guy's green footlocker (the general had commanded) should be like so; and what a proud inspection they'd have if M would just faithfully comply! The general had ordered that Pepsodent or whatever brand of tooth powder a boy enjoyed must go to the rear of the footlocker, left, it mustn't be dirty or dusty, and it must be bottom backwards so the words TOOTH POWDER appeared upside-down, who would have thought it? The general had charged that a fellow's SHAVING CREAM go to the right while his razor, his blade, his toothbrush, and his comb all covered down on his soap dish; and everything must lie on his whitest towel, the general had declared. To this Army-wide order of battle a mere master sergeant in M's training camp had dared add an innovation: he allowed that a Bible might lie in that footlocker in between the handkerchiefs and the shoe polish, rightside-up. This would be optional, a matter of a man's conscience; but other deviations from the archetypical footlocker, the wall locker, the steel combat stuff to be laid on a soldier's bunk, or the soldier himself—would be gigged, Milett had reminded everyone, and gigged would mean no going home Saturday night; no passes.

"So … try. Follow the chart," he had pleaded and hurried to where his wife and his children, whew, still lived, and M, a body of two hundred and fifty American boys of all shapes and sizes and wild idiosyncrasies, most of them draftees, some of them volunteers—M company was getting its house in order conscientiously, in some cases even willingly. But not in Private Demirgian's. Demirgian thought it was idiotic, all this footlocker, wall locker, fleck-of-fluff-on-your-shoelace stuff—senseless, most of M would agree but Demirgian alone conspired with himself to get discharged; out, a consummation that he tried to effect by exercising his will-o'-the-wisp power. Demirgian built castles in Spain, in Armenia, in any area M wasn't—he dared to have madly escapist flights of imagination because his intuition secretly assured him that they'd come to naught. He had said to himself once, I could walk in front of somebody's rifle. He had thought he could fall downstairs and tell the doctors, "My brain—it's loose, it's rattling around inside my head," he had come a cropper playing football once and that is how Demirgian's brain had felt, he knew the symptoms. As yet, none of his schemes had become a clear and present danger to M's staying at full strength—but Demirgian had a new thought tonight. His fancy had seized on something that a hard-eyed private had said in the course of a ten o'clock whiskey break, a private who'd been an assistant policeman, a meter maid or something, in Youngstown, Ohio, who had said, a blow in precisely the right part of a jaw would break it. Demirgian, his intellect stimulated and his inhibition paralyzed by two J&B's, now replied, "Yaa!" or words to that effect.

"Twenty dollars!" the former policeman cried, whipping a wallet out of his vast Army fatigue pocket, slapping a bill of that denomination on the windowsill, clenching his other fist. "Twenty dollars says I can do it."

"Yaa! There was a guy twice as big as you, he hit me right here and he couldn't break it."

"That's not where I'm going to hit you, Demirgian! Where is your twenty?"

"I'll owe it," already conceding.

"Twenty dollars, Demirgian!" said Youngstown's finest, slapping his green gauntlet down again. He had picked up the bill while nobody watched, apparently—he liked its brave sound on the concrete windowsill, smack! the sound of Demirgian's jaw cracking like a chicken's wishbone. He didn't like Demirgian anyhow. Demirgian didn't stand tall, as soldiers should. Demirgian slouched, he carried his head tilted like a damn violinist, and when he talked it rolled like a basketball on a rim, nature imitating Brando's art.

"I'll give you an IOU!"

"Shake! Raise up your chin," and Demirgian did. "A little toward the window," and Demirgian did—Demirgian in some dentist chair, his head tilted, jaw slack, eyes resting tensely on the orange NO SMOKING that was stenciled on M's concrete wall. All of M's sleeping quarters were interior decorated like any city apartment house in its cellar, where the washing machines are. The lengthy low building looked from the outside as though people inside might be working at lathes, and over the black door it announced to all humanity, "M" in black paint.

"Dammit—more to the right."

"I'm waiting. I'm waiting," Demirgian said while in some buried subconscious area he may have thought, my friends better rescue me—which seconds later they did.

"Easy! Yesterday at the 45 range he said to shoot him in the toes," his buddy Sullivan said, stepping between them. "All he wants is get discharged."

"Sure," Demirgian agreed. He had been telling himself, well … either that or I'll make twenty dollars, the Army hadn't paid him in months, something was wrong at the finance office.

"You won't get out of the Army with a broken jaw," Sullivan talking.

"Sure—I won't be able to eat. I'll waste away."

"Crazy. They'll have you wired up in one day. You want to get out of the Army, get him to break your foot."

"Can you break my foot?" Demirgian asked, but there is a tide in men's affairs. Already the former policeman was telling his friends yes! he had been drinking whiskey but he wasn't drunk, he would straight-line any of them—twenty bucks! but M was back getting ready for that inspection. All of this happened—do understand. Demirgian is real, so is everyone in this narrative, even the Chillicothe milkman: all about him shortly. Names and hometowns [appear at the end of the story], middle initials too, apologies to Ernie Pyle.

Anyhow. By two in the morning, all of M's fingernails clean, its blankets as tight as a back plaster, its boots luminous, its combat equipment Brillo-bright and displayed on its bunks in harmony with the general's chart, M company fell asleep in its sleeping bags on the only place left to it—the floor, as infinitesimal iotas of dust silently came to rest on its handiwork.

M was awakened at four o'clock. Today it devolved on the Chaplain to keep it from falling asleep again just after breakfast, for he would be giving M the day's first class. Though his subject—"Courage"—wasn't one notably rich in Benzedrine content, the Chaplain, a Protestant major, intended to say things like, "I suggest to you that it takes a man with courage of conviction to—" and here he would strike the flat of his palm against his wooden podium (his pulpit, he called it), jerking M out of its stupor in time to hear him finish his sentence, the text to this surprising gesture—"—to put your foot down." He had many tricks, this Chaplain; sometimes he made noises but he had silences, too. He intended to say today, "Do you know what takes courage in a foxhole? It is this," and then he would say " … ," he would say nothing, eons of empty time would go by while everyone's eyes popped open to see if the bottom had dropped out of the universe; and then the Chaplain would say, "It isn't the noises that get you, it's the silence." Also the Chaplain would have movies.

M got to his great concrete classroom at eight o'clock on this piercingly cold winter morning. In the vast reaches above it, sparrows sat on the heating pipes and made their little squeaking sounds. A sergeant shouted, "Seats!" and as M sat down on the cold metal chairs it shouted back in unison, "Blue balls!" or so one thought until one learned that M had shouted "Blue bolts!" the nickname of its brigade. M was a shouting company. It built up morale, its high-stepping Negro captain believed; also it kept M awake. Breakfast, lunch, and supper at M were a real bedlam because as each soldier entered the busy mess hall he had to left face and stand at attention, and bellow at a sergeant the initials signifying whether he had been drafted or had joined the Army voluntarily. "US, Sergeant!" "RA, Sergeant!" After the meals, the sergeants totaled up each category before reporting it to the mess sergeant, who filed it one whole month before throwing it away.

"Good morning, men," said the Chaplain. He wore his wool winter field clothes with his black scarf, the symbol of the chaplains corps.

"Good morning, sir! Blue bolts! On guard! Mighty mighty Mike! Aargh!" M shouted back. The expression Blue bolts—we've been through that. The brigade's motto was On guard, and Mike is phonetic alphabet for M; and Mighty it perfunctorily called itself. Aargh was needed for reasons of rhythm, like coming back to the tonic at the close of a song.

Both hands on his pulpit, the Chaplain now pushed it forward a few inches across the black linoleum. Scree-e-ch! and everyone in M sat blue-bolt upright as the Chaplain began speaking. He said, "Courage. … "

But at this instant a very important event was happening one hundred miles away. And if M had only known what a fragile vessel all of its hopes reposed in that morning, its thoughts would have leapt from the Chaplain's lecture and fled across the intervening states to settle upon (a fanfare, please) … the Chillicothe milkman! His name was Elmer Pulver. His was the route east of the N&W tracks in Chillicothe, Ohio, in 1950, when the Korean war began. Elmer in his creaky horse-drawn cart, bringing in newspapers from the gate, rapping on the door cheerily, tat-a-tat-tat, closing the gate behind him so the dog couldn't get out, the nicest, most up-and-coming milkman in town, giving little tasty chips of ice to the same Chillicothe children who would be draft eligible when he was a major in the U.S. Army in Washington, in 1966. Pulver was called up in 1951, but he chose to be an officer instead. Having asked for the infantry first, tanks second, artillery third, he was granted none of these, and as a young lieutenant of engineers, having asked for Korea, he was flown away to Germany—ah, the whimsical they! By 1966, Pulver, now a major and still terribly nice, had been given a desk in the Pentagon's windowless inner rings, also an old wooden swivel chair and a new task: every (would you believe it? every) man in the Army, after he was through training would be assigned to a duty station by Major Pulver. Far from being three horrid witches on a heath somewhere dancing around a pot, they would be Elmer Pulver.

This winter morning he had a stack of those stiff IBM cards the size of an old British pound note, one apiece for every soldier in M. These cards had green edges, and Pulver had a second deck of colorless IBM cards, one apiece for everywhere on earth that the Army had an opening for riflemen. Seated at his swivel chair, Pulver now took a corncob from its round rack, filled it with tobacco, lit it, and started fingering through his IBM's. Doing it the Army way, he would need to take absolutely any green card and white card and fasten them together with a paper clip: rifleman and assignment and on to the next, another day, another dollar. But the Major was a nice person; he knew he had human beings of many kidneys there in his busy fingers and though it meant working overtime—today was a Saturday, the Pentagon was strange and empty—he wanted to put each soldier where he'd be happiest. And on each boy's IBM card there was a code letter signifying where on this varied planet he would truthfully hope to be stationed next.

Some of M wanted the dolce vita in Europe. Some had opted for sunny Hawaii or the Caribbean's warm waters. A few adventurous souls had elected Japan. Were the IBM cards to be believed, none of M's two hundred and fifty soldiers wanted to go to Vietnam—but this wasn't so, the cards weren't right. Bigalow wanted to go to Vietnam. He wanted this for that stock American reason, making money—for in Vietnam's jungles he would earn $65 a month combat pay, which he figured would add to $780 after his twelve months' tour of duty. This he figured to put into IBM: where, he figured, in a few thrifty years it would appreciate to $1,000, which—but beyond that Bigalow hadn't figured. But thus far in his Army career, Bigalow hadn't made his preference known to the proper authorities, no fault of his. Many nights earlier, a tall PFC from personnel office had gathered M together in its dayroom—a rumpus room, an area whose bright green pool and ping-pong tables a soldier saw whenever he was on detail to shine the linoleum beneath them; otherwise it was kept behind a steel chain, off limits. That night, though, it had been opened extraordinarily to let that PFC give everyone some little grey mimeographed forms. "Awright!" he had said. "Now! Those who would like to go to Europe write down Europe," no promises made. He himself had taken one mimeographed form and curled it around his index finger, and while he spoke he wiggled it like a swizzlestick in a highball glass or a pencil making O's: a gesture by which he might mean the Army's having its people eternally fill in mimeographed forms. In fact, M had filled in forms so habitually that within minutes it would forget forever ever having completed this. "Awright," said PFC Swizzlestick. "Those who want the Caribbean … " and similarly for Alaska, Hawaii, Japan, Korea, Okinawa, and Bigalow's coveted Vietnam. Then he had gathered up the mimeographed papers and cabled them to the Pentagon, but Bigalow was on KP that evening, standing in white clouds of steam and washing pans. So the code letter on his green IBM card was an X, meaning no known preference.

Puffing his corncob and thumbing through his second deck of cards, Pulver now learned that in one month the Army had vacancies in Germany and in Vietnam—no place else. Now it happened this freezing Saturday that he had brought his blond and eightyear- old son, Douglas, to the Pentagon (in a week it was Lisa's turn) and to satisfy Douglas' curiosity he showed him the IBM cards, explaining that a soldier who wanted to go to Europe would and that a soldier would go to Vietnam who wanted it—though none did. "Supposing he wants to go to Japan?" Douglas alertly asked, and Pulver explained that though there were no openings that month in this pretty land of geisha girls and cherry blossoms, though there were no Japanese slots he would do his level best by that soldier and order him to Vietnam, since he seemed interested in the Orient and could stop in Japan itself, perhaps, going over or coming back. "Supposing he wants Hawaii?" Douglas said, and Pulver replied: the same, he would go to Vietnam. "Daddy! I can do it myself—please," Douglas said, but Daddy chuckled and said no, and as Douglas sat across from him with a set of crayons drawing some colorful jet airplanes his father began to clip cards together, the green and the white. At noon Douglas ate a hamburger at his desk, Pulver had a roast-beef sandwich on white bread at his.

At noon an apprehensive M waited in its tidy barracks for Captain Amaker's arrival. Amaker, though, was innocently upon the turnpike in his white Triumph convertible gaily driving to New York City. Ha ha! it had been a trick, really the Captain had never been under the walnut shell. Sly old Milett, that cunning sergeant, had simply made M scrub itself harder by invoking Amaker's awesome name—Amaker who really intended to be in Harlem that afternoon digging the jams there with a friend who pulled down $50 an hour sitting in chairs with an Olivetti and looking over his shoulder as though to say, "As long as you're up, get me a Grant's," in the studios of Ebony magazine's photographers. Instead, M would have its adequacy appraised by that fox in sheep's clothing, Sergeant Machiavelli—Milett. He started inspecting the barracks at two o'clock. He wasn't in any very aggravated mood until a moment later, when his fingers moved across the very first soldier's footlocker in order to open it. And then Milett recognized from the almost imperceptible impedance that it gave to his fingertips the presence of that loathsome substance to whose annihilation he had devoted much of his Army career. He cried out "Dust!" and stretching his fingers wide enough to hold a basketball he pushed them at the face of the footlocker's unfortunate owner, whose name was Private Scott. "Goddam! This is a shame," Milett cried, and Scotty looked truly contrite, eyes on the floor. Usually he was a fun-loving guy, a Negro. The day before Swizzlestick's poll he had watched Hawaiian Eye, and on the mimeographed questionnaire he had written, "Hawaii," so that he could dance with the lulu girls.

"Dust! … Dust! … Dust! … All of them!" Milett said, hurling himself from locker to locker and giving each the fingertip test, a furious Pancho Gonzales forehand. "This is a court-martial offense! You aren't ready for inspection!" he screamed—and suddenly his face wasn't purple, his skin wasn't bedsheet tight, the Sergeant was no longer angry. He laughed. He had realized, this whole thing was ridiculous—ridiculous, that a man should present himself for inspection with his footlocker dusty. "You people … you people," laughing, taking his handkerchief out, wiping the filth from his fingers. "You better wake up, you people don't wake up now you'll never wake up. Only with a bad-conduct discharge. And," his head shaking incredulously, "this is just a sergeant's inspection, suppose it had been the Captain himself!" Cap-tain-him-self is how he pronounced it; quick little quarter-notes. Milett was a Puerto Rican. Three times the Caribbean had knocked down the house where he'd grown up; immigrating to Harlem, shining people's shoes so he could take his girl to the movie but worrying what if she should see me shining shoes, washing his hands with Borax but thinking if I touched her maybe she'd smell it—ten years, and then he had found the Army, where a life to be proud of lay within a man's aspirations: even a Puerto Rican's. He said to M now, "I was a PFC," pronouncing it pee-eff-see. "When the officer opened my locker he had to use sunglasses! because I didn't have a towel there, I had aluminum foil all around! And he said to me, You're going to make it some day." Milett's eyes shone as he remembered, there was silverfoil behind his irises. What he couldn't reconcile himself to and couldn't forgive was that M didn't have initiative—M didn't really care.

His punishment: no passes that Saturday afternoon. With those melancholy words Milett went to his rooms on the Army post, where he told the day's happenings to his shapely, sweater-wearing wife, showing her the tainted handkerchief. Demirgian and most people went to sleep on their brown Army blankets. Pulver finished his work, and after driving Douglas home he took the family's beagle, Socks, to the veterinarian's, who gave it shots against hepatitis, distemper, and other diseases of dogs.

"I hate to see-e-e, de ev'-nin' sun go down. … " At the enlisted men's club, a baldheaded man picked concernedly on his banjo, bending over it as though to loosen a knot in one string. He seemed to be thinking … almost … almost. On center stage in their spangled dresses the Barnes sisters did their little dance, and Prochaska, one of M's few emissaries on the club's folding seats, sang quietly along, tapping his visored hat against one knee. "Oh, I hate to see-e-e. … " At seven that evening Milett had given M its passes—but Prochaska couldn't leave, he didn't have the money, they hadn't paid him in months. Something was wrong at the finance office.

Well … that's all right, Prochaska thought. He was happy pinging, and he thought that the Barnes sisters were two really good-looking girls. A pity—he would have liked buying them hamburgers after the show, but Shirley and Wanda had other enlisted men's clubs to do their little dance at. Prochaska had supper without them but that's all right, he thought—he liked eating hamburgers. Prochaska liked everything, really. He liked turning over the soil on his family's Iowa cornfield, he liked to go camping in Minnesota, canoeing on the soda-water rivers and smelling the fish frying at night. Had he believed more in religion, he would have thanked God for these bounties, but he believed in his country and that is what Prochaska thanked. Grateful to America he had joined the Army as other men might tithe to their churches. He was eighteen years old; still, one could imagine his honest face and thin-rimmed spectacles engraved on some friendly curlicued bottle label, some liniment that all folk in the county swore by, Old Doc Prochaska's Tonic.

In a word, he was a soldier who in mediocre war novels would die in the next chapter to last. Prochaska knew he could be killed in Vietnam but he told himself—eating alone in the dark Paradise restaurant just off post, drinking a Coke from a glass, the jukebox strumming a song about a lonely soldier writing his mother from Vietnam itself—he told himself, that's all right, better me than someone with a wife or a family. His mother was already dead; one winter morning, lighting a stove in their Iowa farmhouse, not knowing that the chimney was choked with ice, she had been wounded fatally when the stove exploded and his father had been burned, half a year in the hospital. Prochaska was seven then. He had been prescient about this—he had dreamt of it three nights earlier. Prochaska had presciences often.

The song on the jukebox was to become Prochaska's favorite:

My dearest mama, they just gave us time to write,
I miss you and there's something on my mind tonight, 
At mail call I received your letter here today, 
But I don't understand the things you say. 
You tell me there are people marching in our streets. …
Prochaska knew about them. On his Christmas vacation he and a tall pleasant buddy, Morton by name, had gone to the City, where a lady in Times Square had given them white leaflets saying that we were strafing the Asian countryside, killing the men, women, and children. Another leaflet of hers purported to show a little Cambodian girl burned by American soldiers' napalm. Prochaska had smiled at this. He knew American soldiers better—they liked children. Politely, he and Morton had given the leaflets back.

… marching in our streets, 
The signs they carry say that we don't fight for peace, 
There's not a soldier in this foreign land who likes this war, 
Oh, mama! tell them what we're fighting for.
That was the song's title, What We're Fighting For.

Tell them that we're fighting for the Old Red, White, and Blue! 
Did they forget Pearl Harbor, and Korea too? 
Another flag must never fly above our nation's door. …
Exactly … exactly, Prochaska thought. That is why he had enlisted—it would be Vietnam first, Thailand after that, Hawaii next, California—Iowa. He wanted his children to share his blessings, to sing and go fishing in Minnesota and have hamburgers and Coke.

… above our nation's door, 
Oh, mama! tell them what we're fighting for.
His sentiments exactly. Prochaska began to have presciences again, he knew he was being sent to Vietnam and he was happy about that. And happy that a day or two earlier he had given the mills of the gods one small furtive push. Out on the range firing his automatic rifle for record, he had—cheated, he had inserted two more bullets in his chamber and fired them at his target. He thought now, I've got a high score, I've qualified to go to Vietnam. He put another dime in the flashy jukebox, playing his song again.

It became colder. M was on maneuvers now. This meant living in tents and tearing about on four square miles of mock battlefields mornings, afternoons, and evenings, guns at the ready, helmets on, learning how to acquit oneself in the enemy's presence. And this meant—ugh! getting dirt on one's combat boots, it meant acquiring water-drops in one's canteen and hard round flecks of coagulated gravy on one's mess kit, it meant in one's rifle! a residue of carbonlike matter, this and just twenty-four hours after M would finish maneuvering, back in its dusty barracks with all this execrable stuff, the Major himself would inspect it.

"I wouldn't worry—he shouldn't be bad," Prochaska was telling guys, "a major hasn't the time," untrue. For even as M settled into its cold foxholes its captain stood slightly aside on the battlefield saying uh-huh … uh-huh as the Major enumerated his expectations, cap-a-pie. He told him, "The first thing is the brass," meaning the little yellow U.S. buttons, "I want 'em five-eighths of an inch," meaning from the collar's edge, "I'm really tight on that. Then—the necktie," simulating on his blue infantry scarf, "it should be up real tight. Then going down. The rifleman's medal—is it centered? The pocket buttons. … " His name was Major Small. A good officer, a veteran of Vietnam, well liked by his soldiers, his tragedy was to be at that uncertain stage in his Army career when, no longer a captain, he wasn't yet a lieutenant-colonel, he had nothing to do but command a battalion—that is, nothing to do. His rank afforded him such narrow creative outlets as recommending that the urinal tubes be marked URINAL TUBES and noting, after his last visit to this practice battlefield, that a sergeant was sucking a toothpick. On getting the Major's fault-finding letter, the college-educated lieutenant in charge of this maneuver area had written a restrained answer, "It doesn't appear that the man with the toothpick was corrected early," but then he had found himself scribbling, "I am sure if I went into any area I would sooner or later find people taking a break from the rigors of their diurnal duties," and then he had scrawled, "Res Ipsa Loquitur," hoping the Major had to look it up. Unlike President Lincoln, the Irish lieutenant had really fired his letter off, though he routed it through a chain of command that he knew would shudder and fire it back before it could settle s-s-s-s! on the Major's desk.

Better a sabbatical in Torremolinos, waiting out the lieutenant-colonelcy list and writing the Memoirs of a Company-Grade Officer. But regulations forbade it. " … All right," the Major was saying, "on down. Are the boots polished?" the Major touching abruptly on rock bottom, giving M's captain a parting wink and, pausing to tell a private to shave, quitting the field.

By then, M was in its foxholes and waiting to be mock attacked. The sky was the color of factory fumes and under it the empty battlefield stretched and stretched, it seemed a man might need a month to cross it, crows would be the only living creatures. M had some blank ammunition in its cold rifles, and after expending this it had orders to cry bang! bang! bang! enthusiastically. The young lieutenant, whose attaboy way of talking would make him an excellent boy scout camp counselor in civilian life, though he was an insurance salesman, was jogging from one bleak foxhole to another, giving each man a love-tap on his helmet, urging him on. "Hey there!" he said to Scotty, of the dusty footlocker. "I've got your position spotted—know why? Your mess kit! I could hear it rattling 'way off. Fill it with something!" the lieutenant said. "Fill it with leaves—pine needles—a pair of mitten liners—newspaper—toilet paper—cotton—old powder puffs," he seemed to be saying, "ticker tape—feathers," and Scotty paid attention, trying to remember everything the lieutenant was telling him to fill his mess kit with, so it wouldn't rattle. The lieutenant gave him a love-tap and moved to another Negro soldier, who appeared to have frozen to death inside his foxhole. "Hey, young man—are you cold?" he asked. "Yes, sir," words from the grave. "Where are you from?" "Newark, sir." "Well—doesn't it get this cold in Newark?" "No, sir." "Well, weren't you this cold playing b-ball?" "What, sir?" "Playing basketball?" "No, sir." "Well—weren't you out in the street?" "No, sir, we were in the gym." "Well—weren't you in the streets sometimes?" "In the summer, sir." The lieutenant shrugged, and giving him no tap he moved on to Williams, also a Negro, a gentle Florida boy whose imagination was always getting jerked out of its innocence whenever the Army spelled out to its soldiers what it expected of them. "Attaboy—keep yourself down in the foxhole. Nothing above it," said the lieutenant. "Only your head."

Only my head. Are they serious? Williams said to himself. Could it be that of his body's I-don't-know-how-many bones the Army would have him expose the very one that was most sensitive to enemy fire? Were common sense and soldiering so alien, then? A hand or an elbow, now—if duty required it, Williams believed he would wave it over his foxhole selflessly, a proof through the night of something or other; but a head? They get you there they've got you, he thought. Rather, he would choose to be safely stowed and watching through—well, a periscope, as events out in no-man's-land would take their wonted course. A periscope: he remembered he had been bought one at seven, it was painted blue and yes! it had little yellow comets on it, he had stolen around Florida spying on his three little brothers and three sisters, none of them the wiser. A periscope could be fitted to his rifle sight, the rifle could be held above his foxhole—hmm. Williams thought about this as the mock enemy army attacked, as a Choctaw Indian sergeant shouted through a loudspeaker, "Americans—surrender! You don't surrender we'll cut off your fingers!"

That night at chow, Williams talked periscopes with a more sophisticated Philadelphia friend of his, Hofelder, both of them sitting on the frosted battlefield. In their narrow mess kits the pale vegetables were merging into one another like water colors. Except for its tasting cold, the supper was no better or worse than M's usual diet—at this moment, frankly, give or take adjustments for time zones, the whole American army was being served the same thing, the master menu it was called. Williams and Hofelder were eating this master menu except that at M the pot roast had been deleted, and frankfurters substituted, when Williams broached his revolutionary idea.

"Yeah, but you could just see in front of you," Hofelder said. "You couldn't see on your flanks."

"Well … " said Williams.

"There's no sense looking in front if they're going to jump in your foxhole behind."

"Well … maybe it wouldn't work. But maybe it would," said Williams.

"They gave me one of those things, I wouldn't use it I'd throw it away."

"Well … it might not be good. But it might not be bad," said Williams, thoughtfully chewing his oatmeal cookie.

In the distance they could hear little Swiss cowbells tinkling—actually it was soldiers finishing chow and washing their mess kits in the steaming cans. And there were other conversations in the darkness, of course. All were the ordinary bivouac ballads ("I don't care who, I say that any girl can be made." "Not if she's a Christian." "I don't care if she's Christian, Jewish, Buddhist … ") but that night in Williams' cold squad tent a most extraordinary topic of talk arose, briefly insinuating itself amidst the more usual ones. Vietnam, and it cropped up almost naturally. M had gotten back at nine o'clock; now, huddling stiffly over a potbellied stove, the wind blowing the bare electric-light bulb crazily about, his shadow skittering over the dirt floor, a soldier from Texas had muttered, "Close the door," as somebody walked in. "Were you born in a barn?"

And a second soldier had said, "He was born in a cave. That's why he leaves the door open."

And a third soldier had said, "Now it's so cold, for twelve months we'll be where it's a hundred degrees at night."

And that was about it, the topic seldom rose again throughout maneuvers, Vietnam was far in the future—weeks. The last words in the conversation were Yoshioka's, a boy born in California of Japanese parents who seldom wrote him, a boy of heavy spirit who'd had it on good authority (a sergeant's) that the Army didn't send Orientals to Vietnam because other soldiers might fire at them mistakenly. Yoshioka now said, "Shit," his favorite figure of speech, an idiom that in Yoshioka's voice slid by degrees down the scale and curled back on itself like a scorpion's tail or the corners of his concomitant mouth. "I'm not going to be there—I'm an Oriental," he announced, and then people talked of the cold again.

Needless to say, Yoshioka had answered Swizzlestick's questionnaire by asking to go to Japan—he had a grandmother there. Williams had asked for Europe, none of those dangerous foxholes, and Hofelder had been on KP.

Demirgian thought no! no no no! they could torture him, court-martial him, ta-ta-ta-ta the firing squad, anything! but I'm … not … getting … a haircut! No! His buddies were coming in from the barber's like crazy-people, throwing their arms about, kicking their footlockers, howling out to the gods, "How can I go home this weekend" or "How can I get married now," Demirgian alone remaining a mammal: he had simply said no—no! With a hammerlock his sergeant could hold him in the barber chair, zip! with electric clippers it only takes fifteen seconds, but they had a policy no roughing a trooper and certainly no wrenching his wallet from his pants pocket to give the barber his seventy five cents, union scale. Demirgian hurling himself free, the barber was poorer by a fourth of his minute-by-minute wages when he drove his Cadillac from the post, whose general himself had muttered once, "I should be in that business."

The thing had been a sergeant's idea—the haircuts. With the Major due to inspect M tomorrow, with the footlockers parallel, the toilet articles in each of them congruent with the next's, still the sergeant had known that his sense of symmetry would be betrayed by those uncontrolled towers of protoplasm who would stand by the very aisles the Major walked through—some of them brachycephalic, some prognathic, some of them different colors. Cosmetic surgery being ridiculous, at least he could order M into one harmonious state of bald-headedness. Demirgian knew—he would stick out tomorrow like a porcupine in a pumpkin patch, he foresaw that, he imagined the Major coming to him, saying, "Soldier, don't you know to take your hair off in an officer's presence?" or something as withering, eyeing him coldly. If that happened Demirgian thought he couldn't contain himself, him an individualist, an Armenian, he thought he would scream terrible things at the Major, his heart sank as he saw himself tearing his uniform off, throwing his combat stuff on the floor, dumping his footlocker over. …

… Why not? If that didn't get him out of the Army, would anything do it? Demirgian thought. And so the next morning Demirgian stood at his green footlocker steeling himself against the Major's fateful question, determined to follow his natural bent.

Truth to tell, the Major himself didn't look forward to inspecting M; it would be a distasteful duty. For every soldier he came to was meant to bring his rifle to the crisp position of inspection arms, saying, "Sir! Private so-and-so, such-and-such platoon," and M being what it was … well. When the Major started with Scotty everything went smoothly, Scotty was easygoing, but as he came to the second footlocker the soldier there absolutely shouted, "Sir! Private Pender! Third platoon!" and covered the Major with little drops of water that had to remain there—for as inspecting officer, dressed in his Army greens, his campaign ribbons a rainbow, the Major thought it would be ludicrous if he were constantly seen to be wiping his face with his handkerchief. "You don't have to sound off quite so loudly," he said to Pender, who happened to be the camp's heavyweight boxing champion, "try it conversationally," but he had two hundred and fifty more soldiers to go. At length he came to a boy whose contorted face, an iron boiler almost ready to pop, promised an even lustier reception than most. Resignedly the Major stood there—but Demirgian was waiting too, waiting for that special question. Whole geologic eras seemed to pass, canyons eroded, the dinosaurs became extinct, until one of the parties to this awful silence finally broke it, whispering, "My name is Major Small."

Taken unawares, Demirgian said, "Uh … " and then he said, "Sir … Private Demirgian."

"Try to remember to say that," the Major said and walked on, leaving Demirgian in a state of flusteredness and in the Army.

One hundred and five people in M would be going to Vietnam—close to half. When the messily typed list of their names and serial numbers came in, the company's good big brotherly first sergeant retired into his sunny office and, opening the manila envelope, actually turned pale. He ran through the names by leaps and bounds and after putting them in again, closing the envelope quickly, twisting the little red string around those two brown cardboard buttons, shoving it all into a desk drawer, locking it, and pocketing the little key, he reflected that he couldn't keep his awful secret forever, that there'd be a day of reckoning when M must be told all—by him, First Sergeant Doherty. He knew about lost battalions, the Japanese death marches, the charge of the light brigade, one didn't become a soldier without understanding that there'd be—times, but never had Doherty's own career been touched by tragedy so closely as now. He said to himself, if only—if only I had some good news to give them, as well! just as a good family doctor might say you've got asthma—now you can live in Arizona. And then there arose in the reaches of Doherty's mind the dawn of an extraordinary idea. Something that he could do for M's unfortunate boys, and hurrying to the next sunny office he said, "Sir … " and he broached his thought to the Captain—who, though he admired it, saying it wasn't within his authority to approve, brought it up with the Major—who, with a heartfelt I-would-if-I could, channeled it to the Colonel—who, cautiously routing it to the General, recommended his ratification: while at the bottom of this mighty pyramid, Doherty waited and waited, his high hopes tempered by knowing that no first sergeant in this camp's history, no matter how solicitous he was toward the Vietnam bound, had ever managed to do this fantastic thing.

Meanwhile … the General had other business. What he gave priority to was that infantry classes should be more effective, and calling his trim colonels and majors to Doughboy hall he lectured them on what he meant effective, this is General Ekman. He said, a classroom isn't the place for a hut! two! three! four! stomach in! chest out! sergeant—no, when a sergeant taught he should be relaxed, colloquial, he should use gestures to make his point, similes from baseball, basketball, anything if it works. "Look at me—I have my hands in my pocket," the General said, barely suppressing a smile. "Is there any man who can't understand me because of my hands in my pocket? If so," with a wink, "I'm going to take them out," and the colonels and majors chuckled, getting the point. Back at their desks, they paraphrased this to their captains, who simplified it and passed it to their lieutenants, until when the sergeants who actually taught these infantry classes drank at this bucket of Pierian wisdom only a drop remained: be more effective. This the husky sergeants interpreted to mean stand at attention and shout even louder. "Let us" the Choctaw Indian sergeant, standing as stiff as a cannon barrel, would say in his stark classroom—"Let us begin by observing the lines a this map!" his neck almost paralyzed, "Here is … correction! Here! is the prow liner ploint!" for who can stand at attention shouting the probable line of deployment, his stomach sucked in the ferocious sergeant style?

But there was a sergeant who dared to be natural—a Sergeant Foley. Forty years old, bald-headed, an Irish-storyteller sort of guy, whenever officers were not watching he stood at his blackboard relaxed, his hands in his green fatigue pockets, sometimes bringing a fist out to gesture with—he spoke in words you could almost smell, old leathery words, words from the floor of pine forests, keeping an eye on the classroom doors lest any colonels or majors, stopping by, should find him in these disgracefully unsoldierly postures. "I knew a guy in Korea," he would say, laughing a little. "Out in front of his foxhole was this little—tiny—evergreen-tree. But when morning came it was just an ever-tree because he was so scared of it, he'd shot off all the green!"

This snowy day in the windy Klondike shack that was Foley's classroom, he was teaching M something important—going on night patrols. "Now if you're going out to infiltrate a quartermaster laundry company," he began, smiling but serious, "well … you can take flashlights along. But if you're going to another rifle company, you'll want to be careful, and you'll take advantage of every—little—lousy thing there is," unpleasant for Foley to say, worse for M not to have heard. "If your rifle doesn't work, are you going to stand there with a finger up? You do, you know how you're coming back to the States. In a wooden overcoat. If you haven't anything else to hit Charlie with," Charlie being our enemy in Vietnam, Victor Charlie, the VC, "stick—your—thumb—right in his eyes and push it to the back of his head!" Foley gave his instructions with a rueful September smile—for it was ludicrous, two people who hadn't been introduced gouging each other's eyes out, Swift would have thought so, Brecht, but Foley didn't start this war, he only taught about it. "That's the way to take care of those people. Grab 'em by the balls, if you're grabbing them you're going to feel no pain."

Seated on a cold classroom bench, one of Foley's pupils hung on his every diabolical word: Russo his name was. Small and round and wild-eyed, the Quixotic victim of too many late-late shows on television, Russo had suddenly lied and joined the Army when he was sixteen, and he sat whispering heroic things like "Aargh!" as Foley spoke. But behind Russo two older soldiers played tic-tac-toe and a third whispered, "I got winners." Demirgian's friend Sullivan toyed with his rifle-repair tool, musing, this could be a deadly weapon. Crack-k-k! Put someone's eye out. Standing not sitting, Prochaska tried not to fall asleep after a night of walking in circles in a military manner, mounting guard, and another boy from guard duty now slowly sensed that a rifle-repair tool was jabbing him in the ribs as Sullivan told him, "Wake up," Sullivan had had guard duty too. Demirgian—guard duty too—leaned over his spiral notebook drawing a long zigzag line, his ball-point pen never leaving the paper: a style of art he had arrived at at twelve, independently of Paul Klee. First he drew a caret mark, ^, and bridging it he drew another ^ beneath it, until his small stack of ^'s began to resolve themselves into sergeant's chevrons. Around them, Demirgian's unrelenting pen delineated an arm, with hairpin turns it made fingers, it curved over a hairless head, dropped into a hideous smile, and after pursuing its wayward course down to a belly it manifested itself as a pair of legs, terminating on the left combat boot—whereupon, Demirgian saw he had left something out. Again putting pen to paper, Demirgian wrote on the sleeve where the service stripes go, the word DUMB.

"That's all one line," he whispered, letting Sullivan see it.

"One line?" and tracing it with his finger, "Yeah … it's all one line. Captain?"

"Sergeant!" said Demirgian, his feelings hurt. What he held against Foley was that he kept harping on the topic of Vietnam—Vietnam—Vietnam, sure he had to motivate people but enough's enough! Demirgian thought, the word was being drained dry. Like most of M, on the crest of whose bell-shaped curve were written the lines, What the hell, somebody's got to go—like most of M, Demirgian would ardently rather be in Vietnam than be sitting listening to sergeants talking about it, inspecting his footlocker, telling him to pick up matches and clean his boots—anyplace was better than M, anyhow it wouldn't be cold. Still … there were other romantic places, and when Swizzlestick had polled him Demirgian had written "Europe" on one of those mimeographed forms, "Caribbean" on another, and "Korea" on a third, he wasn't taking chances.

-- Up front, Foley and his night patrol were in the attack, "Go on—you're firing from the hip, if you see somebody in a hole, he throws a grenade, go down in the hole with him! that's what you've got that knife on the end of your rifle for!"

"Aargh! Fix bayonets!" Russo yelled under his breath.

"Then— you— leave— and get lost in the woods just as fast as you can. Because old Charlie is going to be after you!"

"Hey," Sullivan whispered to a friend. "How's your wife and my kids?"

His lecture over, Foley put a Technicolor movie on, whose narrator also talked straight from the shoulder. He said, "I'm Sergeant Crowley and I'm taking out a night patrol," and he said, I'm getting my men ready, they're putting on camouflage, I'm giving them mud and dirt and ashes and burnt cork, they're rubbing it onto their boots, their clothes, their rifle barrels, their belt buckles, their bayonets. … Demirgian laughed and laughed, he couldn't help it. Foley smiled too, he understood, but another sergeant with three battle stars and two purple hearts noted Demirgian's frivolousness and only snarled. "Watch and see!" he said, meaning Demirgian, meaning Vietnam. "He's the one who'll be dead in one week! Watch and see!"

Dark and early on a Friday morning, M company, innocent of any acquaintance with how very special a day this would be, was awakened its usual way by a sergeant walking through its Hadean rooms shaking the beds and saying, "Let's go … let's go … let's go, gentlemen." At four in the morning there was something about the barracks that was— low, it was like a bare light bulb at the bottom of a mine shaft, one in which big brown caterpillars slept on the walls. Of course it was black outside. A transistor radio that had distantly played rock-and-roll through the night now shouted "Go! Go! Go!" to some unimaginable audience, and an announcer chortled, "It's cold and windy and by George! I'm going to tell you, it's going to be cold all day—the high in the twenties!" Someone in M said "Damn," and others muttered things about two sorts of 'uckers from under the brown blankets that still hadn't moved. Wherever that radio station was, it wasn't on M's planet, where time ran at a fraction of that speed. The news was that Johnson had met his senior advisers again, amid indications that he would do thus-and-so in South Vietnam.

For breakfast M ate a master menu, no foods deleted, no victuals substituted, and then it shuffled outside for a six-o'clock flag ceremony, forming its shadowy ranks on the snow. In front of M stood Doherty, its first sergeant, his doldrums not quite driven away by two black coffees that he had drunk beneath the mess hall's peeling fresco of Roman charioteers while he gloomily ran a thumbnail down a manila envelope and muttered to himself, "Bad day at Black Rock … Bad day at Black Rock." Now a bugle sounded, issuing from a drab signal corps MX-39A/TIQ-2 record player at the adjutant's office a half-mile away. M saluted. Somewhere in the night an American flag was rising, but M saw only its desolate barracks lights and above them in the south the cold constellations of Sagittarius, Scorpio, and Libra. When the music ended, Doherty dropped his salute and spinning around to the company said, "At ease! The following enlisted personnel have received orders for Vietnam—when I call your name answer and fall out to the dayroom. Arrington!" There was silence. "Arrington!"

"He's on KP," said a voice, and Doherty continued hastily down his list.

Thus did M company come to apprehend its destiny. Later that day it would have theories why this or that soldier had or hadn't been chosen, phrases like shuffle the cards, names in a hat, darts on a dartboard, and you-you-you would be heard through the noisy barracks, but never would M guess that the moving finger had been its own; for Swizzlestick's mimeographed forms had long before been papered over in its memory by a dozen others. One shrewd theory that day would owe to a Florida boy, an alligator hunter name of Newman who couldn't reconcile himself to a random universe. Observing that he himself, Williams of Florida, Morton of Texas, and Yoshioka of California were on Vietnam orders, he would reason that the Army sent people there from the Southern tier of states, who would acclimate to the heat quicker—a plausible hypothesis that would have several adherents. Of course it was coincidence, Newman had asked for Japan and Williams had been given a bum deal: he was near the bottom of the green IBM deck, and Pulver, smoking his corncob pipe and reaching the card of that gentle Negro periscope operator, had realized he hadn't enough places left in Europe for every soldier who wanted one. At last letting his fingers obey the haphazard electrical impulses emanating from his cerebellum, skipping over Williams he had given a European assignment to the next soldier down, another tall Negro who already stood at the first sergeant's door to ask to be transferred to Vietnam. When he had written down "Europe," he hadn't been thinking that it snowed there.

Demirgian went to the telephone booth and called home. "Jirier—" he said to his younger brother, slipping his bloody handkerchief back in his pocket, speaking quietly. His handkerchief had gotten that way after his nose began bleeding when he started crying after he stopped laughing, the first of his three violent reactions to the news he now gave to Jirier: "I've got orders to Vietnam." His lady-killing friend Sullivan, who still dreamt he would go to the Caribbean, dating girls in yellow bikinis, fell out to the clamorous dayroom to learn if Doherty's cry of "Sullivan!" meant him or M company's one other Sullivan.

"Which one is RA 1146 … " Doherty began.

"Here, Sergeant," Sullivan said.

"All right, the other Sullivan may leave," and Sullivan thought, what the hell—? looking hurt, falling back on the ice-cream vending machine. Bigalow, who wanted Vietnam but couldn't notify the Pentagon because he was washing pans—Bigalow was wreathed in smiles, but then he was always smiles, he looked like one of those faces on porcelain Bavarian beer mugs that smile and smile self-satisfiedly whether a mug is full or empty. Not finding anything by Bigalow's name but an X meaning no known preference, Pulver had assigned him to Vietnam. Hofelder, the Philadelphia boy who didn't think much of periscopes, getting over a fever, had happily left his sickbed to be with the buddies he would go to Vietnam with, little guessing that an hour later the personnel office would have a cable from Pulver reassigning him to Fort Lewis, Washington. Russo, the Lochinvar who joined when he was sixteen, stood in the noisy dayroom and made quick soldierly stabs and butt strokes with a mimical bayonet. He was going to Vietnam gleefully, though he wasn't even of age to be in the Army. We're all in it together—M was happy about that, and there was hearty shaking of hands, slapping of backs, as M watched the dayroom filling with the same sea of familiar faces that had blotted the rest of the universe out, literally! except in the lonely toilet and shower stalls, for eight weeks, and which would be snugly around it in the year to come. Most boys in M were happy to go where they'd have friends, where the sergeants wouldn't order them around and it wouldn't snow—honored, if a little surprised, that America had found them equal to the manly task of defending it.

Someone said, "What's the matter with Chaska?" Since everyone in M wore his family name stenciled over his shirt pocket, naturally he was known by some pleasant diminutive of it—Scotty, Willy, Sully, Demirge, Yoyo for Yoshioka, or Chaska for Prochaska, who now stood leaning across the upper deck of his bunk, sobbing, his shoulders making his iron bedstead rattle, his voice choking on the words, "This is too much. My nerves … my nerves are gone," and "This is the first nervous breakdown I've ever had," and "I'd like to just go outside and freeze to death," and "I've never thought of killing myself but I am now," pushing and pulling his green fatigue cap through his hair. Prochaska's state had nothing to do with orders to Vietnam, in fact he wasn't going. On polling day, remembering the nice seventeen-year-old Swedish girl at the Paradise restaurant who served him well-done hamburgers, he had written "Sweden" on Swizzlestick's mimeographed form—Swizzlestick, knowing that Sweden was neutral with no American troops stationed there, had changed it to Europe, and Pulver had assigned him to Germany. No—Prochaska was at this extremity because of a chain of circumstances starting at the very soldier who asked, "What's the matter with Chaska?" Some nights before, ironing his Army greens, that careless fellow had burned Prochaska's hand with the iron, causing a raw wound. Naturally enough, Prochaska didn't want to put this painful hand in a tub of hot water frothing with GI lye-soap when he was assigned to do KP in K company's kitchen on this momentous Friday morning. It happened, though, that K's was the very kitchen that the General had given his monthly award to—a wooden plaque bearing a bronze shield with a quasi-heraldic device on it, a chef's cap imposed on a stirring spoon dexter on three saucepans—a plaque that K's burly mess sergeant anxiously wished to retain in its place of honor over the vegetable steamers, his name was Sergeant Soda. So when Prochaska, told to plunge his wounded member into the pots and pans in that alkaline vat, politely had to demur, is everyone still with us? Soda was understandably annoyed that a rival company had jeopardized his kitchen's preeminence by sending him KP's who were half-crippled, and Soda's culinary staff took its revenge by riding on Prochaska mercilessly, yelling at him, "Hurry up! Faster! Let's go! Let's get on with it," as he scrubbed the little lines of cement between the glazed tiles on Soda's floor. Unable to take it and fleeing back to M's friendly sanctuary, Prochaska now leaned on his bunk in tears, trying to collect himself. He moaned, "I used to like KP, it was lots of fun. But now … I wish I were going to Vietnam, just so I could get out of this!"

As indeed he would have. Because—with the upper echelons now approving—all the men assigned to Vietnam were to get their weekend passes that afternoon, this had been Doherty's good news. He broke it to M's expeditionary force when it had gathered in the fluorescent dayroom. He said, eight o'clock that morning they'd have their communism class, nine o'clock they'd have a two hours' review of Army drill, the left face right-face business, the last lesson in their infantry training, twelve o'clock they'd be back to eat master menu, and when the grey barracks had been tidied up they'd have— passes, they'd have Friday as well as Saturday night to be with their families before going to war, though it meant missing the Colonel's own inspection. Sunday they'd—Doherty said sternly that they'd be back by Sunday midnight, Monday to Wednesday they'd fill in mimeographed forms, get their underwear dyed forest green, Thursday they'd graduate, Friday they'd leave to Vietnam. "Now! We had to go as high as Brigadier General Ekman," Doherty said. "Men, you can show your appreciation for those three-day passes by getting back on Sunday night!"

"Yes, Sergeant!" M replied—the passes were all it thought about.

"You aren't back you will be court-martialed. Men," Doherty's voice dropping, "this isn't just being awol. This is called missing a movement. Men," dropping, dropping, like a phonograph record with the plug pulled, "I think it holds something like six years and a DD," a dishonorable discharge. "You don't want to miss that movement. Miss it," his voice going back to speed again, "and you'll have the DD over you all your life! And! Since you won't get a decent job neither will your kids! Cause they didn't have a decent education! And they won't be eating properly! Cause you won't have the money! NOW! IS EVERYONE COMING BACK ON SUNDAY?"

"Yes, Sergeant!" M replied.

"Men--" it was the Captain speaking, "Men, they're making a guinea-pig of my company. You guys can be selfish and not come back on Sunday or come back too pooped to pop. Then you'll upset the applecart, they'll never give us three-day passes again."

"Remember what's coming up behind you!" Doherty put in. "Fifteen thousand guys and you'll be meeting them all through life. Fifteen thousand guys who won't be able to say bye-bye if you're not back on Sunday!"

"You've got my ass hanging on a lamppost," the Captain cried. "You can lower me down or leave me there! So—ARE YOU GUYS COMING BACK ON SUNDAY?"

"Yes … sir!" M shouted back.

"All right. I'll be waiting for you," the Captain concluded.

And then M went to its communism class, and then it went out to practice marching, a barrel-chested Negro sergeant calling the cadence: the real thunderous voice of authority! His breath made steam as he called into the morning air, "Hold your head and shoulders high! Mighty Mike is passing by! Am … I right or wrong?"

"You're right!" M shouted back, its right feet adding a drumbeat, striking the snow-covered ground.

"Delayed cadence! Mike cadence! Company cadence! Count!" the sergeant sang out.

And everyone answered, "M … I … K … E! M … I … K … E! Migh … ty Mike! Migh … ty Mike! Fight fight FIGHT!" as little wisps of wind-blown snow curled around their marching feet.

Saturday night. M's sweet-sorrow night. Do not believe that a soldier on these storied occasions has a loved one in his arms—no. Sullivan's girl was in Stowe doing parallel turns, and Sullivan sat reconciledly on a stool in his mother's yellow kitchen murmuring, "Commonwealth 6-1234" and "Adams 2-2000" into an imaginary telephone. His giggling youngest sister, her braces glittering happily, her fingers nimbly scribbling marks on a set of stiff IBM cards, was crying to Sullivan, "Ooh … faster" practicing to become a telephone operator. Williams' girl friend waited in Florida lovelorn, a can of Williams' favorite creamed corn in the Frigidaire, the Army's finance office having put the two asunder. Something was wrong at Finance, it hadn't paid Williams for months, on Saturday he couldn't leave camp, and he went to the movies with California's lonely Yoshioka: Beachball, the movie's name. Bigalow met a girl at a YMCA dance and touché! Bigalow kissed her goodnight, his greenwood tree the portico to her boardinghouse, his feet turning numb in the snow, his home was in Oregon and $141 away. But in Greenwich Village that winter's evening in the if-I-had-a-hammer-loud pad of four cuckoo defrocked monks, one soldier who really swung was a PFC whose relevance is that he worked eight to five at the finance office, managing M's pay. M's long history of indigence should not be laid to this happy PFC, though. No beatnik himself, he was devoted to his dusty little adding machine except—alas, the servant of two sergeants, he was a GI first, a pay clerk second. Friday at camp he had pulled KP, Saturday he had watched a movie on guerrilla warfare: no exaggeration, the tenth time. Sunday the dingy finance office wouldn't be open, Monday he would have the snow shoveling detail, Tuesday morning all systems go! the PFC could work on M's old musty pay records, his raincloud-colored fluorescent lights flickering till after midnight, his adding machine making its lonely metallic sounds, but Wednesday he would have the laundry detail, Thursday he would see more movies, Friday he—but Friday, M would go to Vietnam. This had been the PFC's predicament for many months.

With a real physical telephone, Sullivan called up his schussing girl friend's friend, Debbie, and asked her to the Saturday night movies, he couldn't go parking with her, in conscience. Across town in his family's crazily gabled house, Demirgian sat with his schoolmates as they played whist at a round oaken table—whist! Once it was hula hoops, the Beatles, now in Massachusetts the teen-agers were playing knock-whist and eating knackwurst as they talked of civilian times. "Remember the assistant principal— Mr. Silvia? Saliva we called him? Mr. Spit? Remember … " Demirgian was saying, playing a club, wearing a soft yellow jersey.

"What do you learn in the Army?" a friend of his interrupted, winning the trick, raking the cards in, clack!

"How to catch monkeys," Demirgian answered, and as their game of whist hung in sudden abeyance he explained to his awed cronies how to survive in the jungle on monkey meat. Hollow out a coconut, Demirgian said, quoting a class on the basics of Robinson Crusoeism. Tie it to something, put in a chunk of coconut white, and hide, Demirgian continued. "Well—so the dumb monkey, when he puts in his hand thinking gee, I got me a nice piece of coconut, the dumbbell can't pull it out because of his fist, he hasn't the smart to let go. And you're hiding behind a tree, you're there with a bat beating the monkey over the head. I mean, not that it's cruel or anything but well: you've got to eat." Though he laughed bitterly, really Demirgian wept to be in an organization so lost to decency that it taught him to hit monkeys, helpless monkeys with a paw stuck in a coconut.

Out in the Demirgians' crowded living room, a TV cowboy rode across Marlboro country to the accompaniment of unauthentic Western music. Nya-a-a-a, Armenian woodwinds, music to belly-dance to, music to charm snakes, for Demirgian's dark skinned family doubled its Saturday-night pleasures by looking at television while it listened to records, and eating purple grapes and figs, and drinking coffee from tiny china cups. Demirgian's mother was Greek, his father was Turkish, a rug repair man. Demirgian himself was Armenian, there was a genealogical reason for this but as soon as one grasped it, f-f-f-t it slipped away, leaving a riddle. Demirgian was born in Jaffa; his father was in Astrakhan that day repairing shoes, his mother was a war refugee in Istanbul, obstetricians in all three cities delivered the little rascal, consulting with one another by phone. Or something—it wasn't clear. Demirgian came to America when he was ten, so young that his Eastern heritages fast deserted him, leaving only the residue of three incompatible accents —a dialectal slag, a kind of duh-uh in his pronunciation that to those who didn't know him sounded dopey. And leaving him a real Oriental marketplace of withered old uncles and bosomy aunts, many of these incomparables now in Demirgian's living room eating his mother's grapes on the pretext of wishing her firstborn good-bye. Speaking in Turkish, her voice rising above the come-with-me-to-the- Casbah music without becoming shrill, an aunt of Demirgian's asked the gathering, "And where will Varoujan live?" Varoujan being Demirgian's first name. "In the baraka?" thinking of the French barracks in 1939 in Syria.

"I think not," Demirgian's mother replied, the wild pipes of Yerevan continuing nya-a-a-a. "In the rear there might be baraka but in the forward areas, I think he would live in istihkam," remembering the deep Turkish trenches in 1914 at Tchanak Kale. "Yes—he would live in istihkam in the bataklik" in trenches in the swamps, a feat of Army engineering that the aunt tried politely to conceive of for five whole seconds, chewing a pistachio nut before changing the subject.

"And what will Varoujan eat? I have read," she continued, "that in Vietnam there are no other foods besides rice and fish."

"Varoujan doesn't like fish," Demirgian's mother said. "I have explained to him that he could eat grass if the liquid in it is watery, though not if the liquid is milky."

"And what did Varoujan say?"

"Varoujan said yes, the Army had told him that. I explained that he should put these grasses in water until they are tender."

"But--!" said Demirgian's aunt. "I have read that in Vietnam there is no water that one may drink."

"Woman!" Demirgian's father put in. "You yourself say there is rice in Vietnam. It follows there must be rice fields, does it not? Fields require water—it follows there must be water in Vietnam!"

"Victoria meant drinking water," Demirgian's mother explained sweetly. "But there is water, in the vines and bamboo, the Army told Varoujan that. And that there are monkeys to eat, Varoujan knows how to catch them. And rabbits to eat, as well. And lizards and snakes. So it seems to me, Varoujan will have other things to eat besides rice," pausing, take a pensive sip of Turkish coffee. "Varoujan doesn't like to eat snakes, I don't think. I shall tell him if he doesn't like snakes to decline them." And so this pleasant seminar continued into the snowy night, none of Varoujan's relatives aware that he'd folded his whist deck and silently stolen off to Sullivan's midnight going-away party, on the other side of Newton, Massachusetts.

Comes the dawn— I'll be gone— I just gotta have a honey holding me tight— but Debbie had to be home at twelve and Sullivan drove her there in her tight skinny-rib sweater, minding his manners. Meanwhile, bringing their own bottles Sullivan's friends collected at his home, but when their guest of honor walked in the front door he seemed to be shorn of spirit. It was after twelve. For weeks the Army had kept Sullivan rolling like a tired jalopy with a dead battery, by pushing on him relentlessly—tonight Sullivan had stopped dead. "Hey," a friend of his cried when he shambled in, "they're letting you go to Vietnam? I thought we wanted to win this war," everyone in the living room laughing.

Sullivan answered "Mmf," sinking down in the armchair, his black raincoat on, chin on his chest, a sea of weariness surging through him like the fluids of a broken boil. From a far room he could hear Chillerama on a television set; Sullivan guessed that his mother was close to crying and watching it tenaciously. Strange people with no letters of introduction would come to her home taking her daughters away, the Army would now abduct her only son, leaving her with the black-and-white cat, Jerome.

"So tell us! How do the guys all feel about Vi-et-nam?" a boy with a J&B asked Sullivan loudly.

" … They'll go if they've got to."

"But they don't really want to?"

" … No, they don't."

"Hey, are they scared about going?"

" … Yes."

"Are you scared about going?"

" … Yes."

"The little guy, is he scared also? Huh?"

" … Yes."

"Are you two going to be together?"

" … Yes. We're going to share a foxhole," Sullivan said wearily.

" … Always together, until forever," Demirgian mumbled, half waking up, looking around, half falling asleep again.

"Ladies and gentlemen. Our flying time to Saigon will be approximately eighteen hours. Your attention is invited to the NO SMOKING and SEAT BELT signs. Please comply when the signs are lighted. … "

M company was crossing to Vietnam on a passenger airline and it didn't like the stewardesses. One of those girls in blue incredibly couldn't get it straight between the words cereal and syrup. "Miss, may I have some cereal," Sullivan kept begging her, the stewardess answering "There" and pointing a firm school-marm's finger at Sullivan's syrup. Another of those imperfect angels said, "Look, there are other people on this plane!" when a melancholy soldier, McCarthy by name, it was he who'd gotten married two weeks earlier, asked for an inoffensive glass of milk. Over and over the stewardesses would serve M breakfast: nothing else, their protocol being that it wouldn't be lunchtime till it was noontime, an hour which never caught up with M's upholstered plane as it flew the jetstreams west. Outside of Seattle the earth became dark, it was black over the Aleutians, it was so inky black in Tokyo at some impossible hour of morning, √ -1 o'clock, that all Yoshioka saw of his ancestral home was a dozen blue runway lights, it was black in Manila, the runway lights making frail blue streaks on a stack of aluminum Army coffins, bound the other way. Walking into the night to stretch, Demirgian said, "Those stewardesses aren't so sharp."

McCarthy seconded it, "Ask me, they're a bunch of duds."

Sullivan put in, "A couple of OJT stewardesses," soldier talk for on-the-job trainees.

Dear sirs, McCarthy thought, once he was back in his blue reclining seat, conceiving a self-restrained letter to the officers of the airline. I am a private in the US Army and I had the pleasure to fly on one of your chartered planes to Vietnam. Well—it was scarcely a pleasure, McCarthy thought, not with those cruel stewardesses, still one mustn't be discourteous. I was very disappointed with the flight. I found the stewardesses very … searching for a word, sharp, and hard to get along with, something was faulty there, what was it? Well—were the stewardesses sharp or weren't they? Demirgian had said, "Those stewardesses aren't sharp." Essentially affirming this, McCarthy had somehow lost Demirgian's negative—a paradox. I found the stewardesses very cross, try it again, very harsh and hard to get along with. They were no comfort at all on the flight, and I feel I should bring this to your attention. Yours truly, but the stewardesses didn't have writing paper.

Meanwhile, the plane had landed at Saigon's own Cimmerian airport, and lo! through the wrinkled seats of its khaki trousers M company sensed an unmistakable gravity pull it to Vietnam's legendary soil, the root of M's very being. "Gentlemen," the stewardess began, all ladies having timidly deserted them in Manila, "the temperature on the ground is 84 degrees, the local time is four-thirty A.M. Please remain seated until. … " M had no cause to feel in terra incognita this morning, lost in the horse latitudes. True: one week earlier, Hofelder could catalog all he knew of Vietnam's phenomena in three quick sentences, "It's near China. It isn't a very making-money country. The people must eat rice because there's a lot of rice paddies," but in its interlude of filling in mimeographed forms and getting its green steel helmets, in its vast concrete classroom with its infinitesimal sparrows on the heating pipes M had assimilated two full mornings of practical geography; the Army called them orientations, no pun. First, M had seen a distant one-reeler movie. Its grim narrator had observed that the Vietnamese live in an explosive situation, one in which peacefulness does not meet the challenge of today's needs. After the movie a lieutenant had materialized in this tunnel with a map of M's crescent-shaped destination: it seemed to be tinted red in its communist areas, pink in contested areas, and white in areas where the Vietnamese people had freedom, it looked like the splotchy diseased liver of some rabbit that the sergeants who taught jungle survival classes had told M don't eat. The same remote lieutenant had then screened some Kodachrome slides, the front row whistling loud and lecherously at six Vietnamese nymphs in those pretty pink and blue things of theirs, the lieutenant's oral caption being that Saigon was VD City. Next a prim little captain from the medical corps had taken up Vietnam's endemiology, telling M that it would encounter environmental dangers there that had attendant the need for individual adjustments if M was to meet these dangers successfully, the captain absolutely screaming this as a-r-r-r, the fiendish ground crew of a super sabre jet fighter tested her wild-blue-yonder faculties with one terrible nearby roar. The captain screamed rapidly, to get through his dangers in one fleeting hour. He warned M that cholera, dysentery, and typhoid fever may occur whenever fecal material is ingested by new susceptibles. The incidence—the incidence of tuberculosis is particularly high among prostitutes, he noted. Clonorchiasis and paragonimiasis arise in the livers and lungs of consumers of flukes, and hepatitis, malaria, tapeworm, typhus, dengue, and plague are other maladies he said to beware of. The captain said do yourselves a favor, don't go petting the dogs because they've got rabies. "Everyone's told you the bad things—I'm going to tell you the good things," cried a Negro sergeant first class who M later applauded, one soldier even shouting hooray and Sullivan even laying aside his I'm the Last Kamikaze Pilot Alive to pay close heed. "There's a lot of good-looking girls in Vietnam," the sergeant explained. "I want you to go out of the Capitol hotel! Make a left! One block—make a left! Half a block, cross the street, don't get hit by a taxi—first bar on the right! The Black Cat! Ask for Judy and tell her I sent you," environmental dangers be damned.

From a red-faced master sergeant with the voice of a squawky $10 public-address system, M had heard an extraordinary talk: for in two cluttered months of basic training, two of infantry training, no other sergeant had addressed himself to this vital matter— how to avoid dying. "You can trust no one! No one! Man, woman, or child!" the sergeant, whose name was Admire, cried, "Let's say—you're on a trip to Saigon, you're sitting there in the Happy Bar. A guy comes in in civilian clothes, he puts a package under your stool. Get up and move! Move! Or you're in the streets out shopping. A guy throws a present to you—throw it back! Or at your hotel—a guy parks a garbage truck and saunters away. Watch out! Or a cute little kid on a bicycle leans it against the wall. It may blow up!" Then having shepherded M through its port of disembarkation, Admire had turned on the Kodachromes and related the further perils of the combat zone. He began, "Now this is a punji pit. Each of those bamboo sticks is sharp—is sharp, and there's buffalo dung on every one. There are thousands of these pits in the country! You— will— see them! What advice can I give you against them? Don't— fall— in them! This next is a punji foot-trap. Now each of those sticks is barbed—I said barbed! When the medic tries to remove one, it might just smart! Just a bit! There are thousands of these in Vietnam! You— will— see them! Don't— step— on them!" Admire had further words to the wise and eagle-eyed but no real advice against the sudden mortars or mines, the inconspicuous mosquitoes or scorpions—or cobras. "There's a little one they've got there called Mr. Two-foot," he stated loudly. "If he bites you in the thumb, don't reach in your pocket for a razor blade or a knife! If he bites you anywhere, lie— down— quickly! Because you're dead!"

Throw it back. Don't fall in. Lie down quickly. Each of Admire's travel tips had been another revelation to Williams, whose innocent civilian wits had never foreseen hazards that he couldn't simply meet by keeping in a low crouch. "You guys don't want me in Vietnam—I'm a coward," Williams announced when Admire's lecture was over, exaggerating the state of awareness it had brought him to.

"Well: we're all cowards," one philosophical soldier said.

"Look at it this way," Williams again. "We're walking along. We're supposed to keep quiet. I see a boa constrictor standing up on his belly I'm going to scream. … "

… Four-thirty in the morning as Williams exited the plane at Saigon's black airport, there were no boa constrictors on the ramp. M walked across the dark concrete without encountering punji pits. In a way, Demirgian was sorry about that, disillusioned that on the bottom side of earth the grass seemed to be green and space was Euclidean. It was such a waste! Flustered stewardesses, $30,000 pilots, all that expenditure of highoctane fuel and still someone could say (and did), there's the Big Dipper. Demirgian wished it were anything else, the Southern Cross or Halley's comet or anything to make crossing half the lines of longitude a bit more glamorous, "No—I think it's the orange bowl," he said, gazing at Vietnam's starry sky. "And that thing there, that ought to be the moon. The bright thing with the watermelon shape. In tropical climates it only comes out watermelon shaped. … "

A pity—Vietnam wasn't for poets. Blood in Vietnam still circulated. Gravity worked. If dropped, things fell, and call it a thin imagination, call it common sense, but M had no anxieties as it walked across the jet-black airport toward a low brown building, Americans were everywhere, Americans in grey uniforms, Americans in shadowy trucks and jeeps. Daylight came, a little American captain bicycling by, bibbidy bobbidy, riding it one-handed to keep returning salutes, and Sullivan said to Demirgian, "What a fairy— what a fink," phrasing the sentence just as he would in the United States. M went to the brown building and filled in mimeographed forms, then it ate master menu in which the scalloped potatoes had been deleted and creamed potatoes had been substituted. M company had come to Vietnam.

Within hours it would go up country. An earnest sergeant warned M, "Keep alert!" as M hoisted its duffel bags and itself onto a big open-topped Army truck. "If we pass somebody on the road, if he has something in his hand, I don't care if he's this tall or that tall, girl, boy, it doesn't matter, look to see what it is! And if you don't know, bring it to my attention—fast," looking M square in the eyes. Perhaps M mightn't have ignored this had M seen bushy-bearded men in cloaks behind the greenery or heard weird ipcress sounds, but in this ordinary Army camp it seemed a paranoiac's advice. And candidly, as M drove through the bumpy streets of Saigon with their outboard motor putput traffic sounds and cooking smells, as M rode in its airy truck standing, squatting, and sitting on its duffel bags, it saw about fifty thousand Oriental persons to its right and left and forty thousand had funny things in their hands, wooden boxes, yellow wickerwork baskets, bottles of—what? crockery bowls. Twenty thousand people were hurrying by with little twitchy steps—suspicious. Another twenty thousand were standing still—that was worse. There were one thousand characters in tinny Lambretta trucks who parked them and strolled away, and five thousand citizens on bent-looking bikes and rusty motor-bikes who leaned them against the Mediterranean-looking walls. On one garbage congested street, a child with no pants on who seemed to be playing with empty beer cans rolled one beneath M's truck, M never giving it serious thought. Saigon or Seville, to see a conspiracy in every handbag and handlebar—that way madness lies, one might as well enlist in the Birch society. A curious fact is that M wasn't armed, the "Keep alert" sergeant having no Army rifles to issue it. M's steel helmets were still ambiguous bulges in its duffel bags, and though there were spare helmets in the truck, rustiness had stuck them together, and Bigalow had none while his Russian-born buddy, Dubitsky, had three, like a little Chinese pagoda. "I know," the earnest-eyed sergeant had said, aware that he couldn't fight America's national mania, "I know you've never seen the scenery, you'll want to look around," and there he had spoke true, the only recalcitrant on this Saigon-and- its-environs sight-seeing bus being that boy of sixteen, wild-eyed Russo, who carried a bowie knife long enough to use in dueling and shouted over his shoulder, "Stay awake, fellas—here comes another hay wagon," and other no less faintly ridiculous things. "I got my eye on that guy," he yelled to his unconcerned friends as a young pedestrian pulled a cylinder no bigger than a cigarette from his black pajama pocket, set it on fire, and smoked it.

The bustling people, the blue-and-yellow taxis, everything in Saigon appeared to be about two-thirds life-size, and their colors concentrated as at amusement parks. "Looka! This is like Coney Island without the rides," one soldier cried in an ecstasy of identification as Saigon's little brown splinter-board shops with their peeling red and yellow signs went by, and "This must be the suburbs," as the houses gave way to pale green fields, and "There's a water buffalo!" If only Prochaska had been on this outing, M might be singing Clementine as it drove through the yellow villages where old toothless women peered and children waved, the palm trees, lush and opaque, were nearly in ducking distance, the drab wooden slats in the truck rattling, the dead weight of duffel bags settling down, it squeezed M's feet, it trapped M's feet, the tires roaring, the dust rising, from out of the tall grasses the communists would rush, the band would be ambushed one month later, the French horn, flute, and baritone player shot, the drummer escaping unscathed—and M drove gaily past the high barbed wire and into its division's camp.

Imagine anything: now color it dust, red dust, and that was M's division area, the size of a practice battlefield. M's old dust avenger, fierce Milett, would go berserkers here, for dust was on every canvas tent, red dust lay on the sandbags, the punching-bag shaped water bags, red dust was on every soldier one minute after his reaching here. The temperature was maybe 100 degrees. Climbing from its truck and trudging to some designated tents, M dropped its duffel bags on its narrow cots as whoosh! pillars of red dust rose from the canvas, and going tardily outside again it waited and waited. Russo began to look like a short round man in a sauna bath. He sat on the dusty ground saying, "I'm going to write a letter. Dear sergeant. You were right. It is hot."

Yoshioka came to have a complexion like a bar of wet laundry soap. He turned to the "Keep alert" sergeant and asked, "Any action around here?"

"Oh no," Demirgian answered him. "It's very quiet."

"Shit," Yoshioka said, his favorite word collapsing as usual like an unstrung balloon, "What do you know? You just got here," but M company was to have an answer soon enough.

"Fall in!" And as M formed ranks in the sunlight a buck sergeant made it deafeningly clear that the joyride was truly over. Like artillery fire his commands hit M one after another, "Troops! Atten … tion! First rank, right … face! Forward … harch! Troops … halt! Right . … face! Second rank, left … face! Forward … harch! Troops … halt! Left … face!" until he had M deployed in a line perhaps as wide as a city street. "Forward … harch! Route step … harch! Troops … halt!" he ordered, and M was up against the camp's barbed wire, standing there in the 100 degrees, staring out at what perils God only knew, waifs at the wire of a concentration camp wondering what now? And then the sergeant gave the command Demirgian almost dreaded to hear. The sergeant shouted, "About … face!"

About face! In two crammed months of basic training, Demirgian hadn't had trouble with right face, it was child's play, or left face, a walkaway, and dress right dress—a lark! the guys all bashing each other around in ranks, biff! bam! with the Army's jolly consent. But about face—that had been a dark and mystifying thing. Whenever his drill sergeant had given his alarming order about … Demirgian had shifted faintly to his left foot, and face, Demirgian had slipped his right foot behind it, then Demirgian rose on the tiptoes of both black boots and swung himself daintily around and—aww! why didn't it work? For it didn't ever (try it). Old Sergeant Tisdale, Demirgian's haggard mentor in basic training, a frail and grey-cheeked career soldier, had manifested patience— patience. A graduate of the local school for sergeants, he had earned his right to his Smokey-the-bear drill sergeant's hat by learning that he must bellow forward … march in three distinct syllables that wouldn't be mistaken for port … arms and to scream right … face in two syllables lest a soldier with wax in his ears go to the ridiculous parade … rest. In the lesson on about … face, Tisdale had learned that it wasn't by any means a tour de force demanding a Nureyev's coordination—no, that the saddest sack in the Army could master it if he would remember one pithy word, one open-sesame that Demirgian's cadaverous sergeant now resolved to impress upon his most troublesome stump (a stupid trainee under military protection) one autumn evening. Poor old clubfooted Demirgian reporting in, Tisdale had stood him on his royal-blue scatter rug, a $2.98 scatter rug he had bought at Sears so that the Demirgians of this world wouldn't leave any ugly scuff marks as they writhed to the right, left, and about on his office's linoleum, and in his high quick squeaking voice the sergeant had told Demirgian his magic word. The word was youwilltakeyourrightfootandplaceitapproximatefourinchesbehindyourleftfootandslightlyt otheleftofyourleftfootandpivotonehundredandeightydegreesontheheelofyourleftfootandth eballofyourrightfootturningtoyourright. Demirgian listened attentively, then he rose rooster-like on his toes and—no no no, Tisdale had said, listen again, his voice getting shriller, his patience starting to churn up and whitecaps appearing, his conscience whispering to him, Bambi, your daughter, she's mucking up her fifth-grade homework tonight, she couldn't do fractions, he wasn't home to help her—Demirgian's fault. Despairing, Tisdale had broken his cabalistic word in twain, he cracked it in two less labyrinthine halves, he screamed it by the numbers, one! p … two! all in vain, Demirgian still turned like any gauche civilian. Demirgian came to hate the sergeant. Demirgian wanted to kill him, to push him down the black barracks stairs, it wouldn't be difficult— or a bayonet in his withered tummy, aargh! When he left basic training, when Demirgian took up infantry at M, nothing had changed—oh, the electric switches in those barracks were black instead of sickly green, there were other names on the bed frames and it wasn't masking tape but Scotch tape holding them to the steel, but about face was still just one! p … two! a countdown to spastic disaster, ready, get set, stumble! Once, Demirgian was shown a movie on close-order drill, the narrator, Murrow, called it a symbol of discipline, Demirgian saw undisciplined armies falling all over their bootstraps, Belgian civilians in helter-skelter land, Chinese, who couldn't about face, lying like pick-up sticks in the streets of Shanghai dead or unhappy-looking, Demirgian just couldn't buy it but there was Murrow intoning, discipline— discipline— discipline, you've got to have discipline if you're to become s— but there the film had broken. And here was Demirgian at high noon in the combat zone, a sergeant screaming at him, "About … face!"

Demirgian turned around.

"All right—" the sergeant roared, "move out! pick it up! get it the first time you needn't do it again!" and M disposed itself onto its first professional mission on Vietnam's red soil, Demirgian picking up two small cigarette butts, Yoshioka getting an old match, and Sullivan slinking left obliquely to his tent, a minute ahead of his comrades-in-arms.

That night M lay on its taut canvas cots and listened to noises—o-o-o-o-o things going over, b-o-o-m exploding, ta-ta-ta-ta machine guns, and automatic rifles, dive bombers, a-a-ark tropical birds, lions and tigers, banshees, the spheres of the heavens rolling against each other like empty oil drums, the stars falling and bouncing along the plains: and M wasn't afraid. Experience had anesthetized it to these sounds of battle during its winter of Army training, its many years of John Wayne. M guessed that all of this racket was American made and wasn't aimed at its tents, that it was meant for some conjectured enemy out yonder—it was right. "That's a mortar," Russo explained with no hysteria. "That's—artillery."

"Well: I wish they'd quit it. I want to sleep," Williams.

"What is that?" Sullivan. By this he didn't mean the distant war-movie sounds but a pretty civilian smell that was rising mysteriously from Demirgian's cot.

"Jade East—I like it," Demirgian explained. O-o-o-o-o! B-o-o-m!

"Oh. I like Canoe," Sullivan said.

"I don't," Demirgian said. "It smells like dead roses."

"I like Old English," Sullivan said.

"I don't like that," Demirgian said. "I don't like English Leather either."

"I meant English Leather. I like that," Sullivan said.

"I don't like that," Demirgian said. "It's getting too common."

"I use Brut regularly. That's mine," Sullivan said.

And CRUMP! The tent tottered as Russo calmly declared, "That's a mortar." M's division had started to rummage for communists in the no-man's-land a few yards beyond M's inky-black sleeping area.

"Mother," said Sullivan, not very disturbed. "Hey, take it easy on my bed."

"Some guys like to play cowboys and Indians," Demirgian added. "I like to play this," but he spoke a trifle louder than he needed to. If truth be told, Demirgian was getting scared: it took a man of vision to turn reality about, to see that the equations of parabolic flight must bow to parity, that a whistling can of TNT could go both this-a-way and that-a-way and that M's uneventful side of the barbed wire might someday have its o-o-ms and crumps. Soon, Demirgian would learn to exorcise his anxieties the poet's way, on the cardboard wrappers of C-ration cans he would learn to write cathartic verses, one of his rhymes ending, "You hear the fear yet never shed a tear, every morning … every morning … every morning." But tonight, Demirgian took a sip of J&B from a pint bottle and simply turned up his transistor radio, its music insulating him from Vietnam's alien noises, his perfume from Vietnam's dusty smells.

"I got the freight— train— blues," Demirgian heard, from the armed forces radio station back in Saigon— CRUMP! "Lordy lordy lordy, I got them to the bottom of my rambling shoes. … " CRUMP! The commercials were for US Savings Bonds and for God.

Doesn't it get a little lonely sometimes …
Out on a limb …
Without Him. …
"The pre … ceding," the radio announcer cried, "was presented by— the Armed— Forces— Chaplains Board!" CRUMP! And so it went on M's first night at war: the radio, the tinkling of dog tags as M turned in its sleep, soldiers snoring, and things that go CRUMP in the night.

At four o'clock M was awakened to go on KP. Demirgian was incredulous: and asking himself when in his slow advance toward the cannon's mouth the folderol would cease, if ever, he authorized himself to march M to the murky kitchen, crying in his outraged voice, "Close it up there! Guide around that sandbag! Got to spit-shine your boots tonight! Got to polish your brass! There'll be a diagram tonight, how to lay out your duffel bag! Hut! two three four. … " CRUMP!

Actually, M wouldn't stay at this thunderous division camp—it would fill in yellow forms, then go by helicopter deeper into the boonies to where its assigned battalion was. M was still in: the Army called it the pipeline, and at this critical turn in the tubing Bigalow dripped out. Called through a squawk box to the dusty personnel tent and told to hie himself to the public-information tent to be interviewed for a writing job, Bigalow, the smiling soldier of fortune whose one ambition in Asia was to strike it rich, perceived he was at a fork in life's road. With one year in a line company he might become sergeant, a corporal got $163.50 a month but a sergeant got $194.10, one and one-half years of that dollar a day, another share of IBM. On the other hand, being where the caissons roll had certain weak points. One thing, Bigalow hadn't been trained to fire rifles but to work a mortar, a steel contraption the size and shape of a drainage pipe out of whose open end Bigalow was to lob explosives at communist soldiers a mile, two miles away (CRUMP). But if Charlie came any nearer—say to the same lively trench—Bigalow, short of banging him on the head with his drainage pipe, would need to defend himself with a sidearm, a little stick-em-up pistol that he had never yet fired successfully. One miserable day in infantry training, Bigalow had stood with his quaint pistol squinting along its sights at a great quantity of rain, in whose far reaches he could sometimes spy a little shimmering bull's-eye, as ghostly as moiré. But every time Bigalow raised his little wet pistol to bring this apparition to earth, his poncho behaved like a sail and Bigalow's outstretched arm became a boom, it swung to leeward and Bigalow's watery target remained inviolate of bullet holes. Dripping wet, the skinny lieutenant in charge of this fiasco had reported back to a major, a bear of a man whose nickname was Iron Mike.

"Sir—" the lieutenant had said, saluting, standing in Iron's office but shrinking into the door jamb, a haven with the added advantage of holding him at rigid attention— "Sir, the men couldn't grasp the pistol."

"What do you mean, couldn't grasp? It's your job to teach them!"

"I did, sir, but the men couldn't grasp it. … "

A real dilemma. Bigalow sought out the serious-eyed "Keep alert" sergeant to ask his advice. "I don't know why anyone would want to be on the line," the sergeant said in some amazement—he had been there months. "You don't care about being wet because you're never dry. Your clothing rots. You reach in, pull out your undershirt and throw it away. And you're being shot at. And wounded. And when you're healed and I mean half healed you're sent right back to the line."

"Yes. But do you make rank?" Bigalow asked.

"I say better to be alive and a corporal than a sergeant and dead. Think about it— think about it."

Bigalow continued to meditate about it, though when he walked into the public information tent and handed his yellow form to a captain sitting by a dusty typewriter, the captain just shouted, "You went to Arizona! I went to Nevada!" and Bigalow was a publicist before he could meditate further. But destiny hesitated over Bigalow's best friend, Dubitsky. Also a college boy (Scranton) and also a candidate for a public information job, Dubitsky's dossier gave the young captain pause. "So. So personnel sent you here," he said experimentally, not very confident there was a slot in public information for a man who'd studied philosophy with the Jesuits, who spoke Ukrainian fluently and four other languages but couldn't type. "Uh … see anything special in the personnel tent?" he asked.

See anything? How could Dubitsky help it, the tent had been practically built of them! "I saw a lot of playmates of the month, sir," Dubitsky said.

"Which month did you see?"

"I was looking at November, sir."

"November. Uh, what was November wearing?" All right—what do you ask a man whose last written work was a paper on Dewey's pragmatism?

"Sir, November had sort of a lace negligee. It was over one of her legs though it wasn't over the other."

"Which of her legs was or wasn't it over?"

"Sir, I think it was her right leg it wasn't over."

"Well, we want to be accurate here. We don't want you writing about the general saying the negligee was over the wrong leg."

"Yes sir. The negligee wasn't over her right leg."

"Hell," a public-information colonel interrupted, looking up from a Michigan rummy game board that his mother had just mailed him. "Hell, can he spell?"

Minutes later, two happy former mortar men reappeared at the tent where the rest of M was stuffing its duffel back in its dark green bags, Bigalow smiling mindlessly and speaking for both. "Hey—did you hear about us? We're going to be newspaper reporters."

"Cowards," said a jealous unconverted mortar man, continuing to pack.

"I bet we get more medals than you do!"

"Yeah, a yellow one for being yellow."

"The enemy was all around me!" Demirgian began to cry in mock heroics. He was ashamed that two friends should be so tolerant of tedium as to make their home in an area where they'd sometimes pick up cigarette butts and do KF. "All around me! And all I had was my Lindy ball-point pen. They lunged at me. … "

" … They pinned me to the wall!" another boy continued. "I pulled out my ballpoint pen! I stabbed! I stabbed! I stabbed … " and then M climbed aboard its helicopters, its duffel bags in the center aisles like a string of gristly sausages and it rose deafeningly toward the north as Bigalow, Dubitsky, and McCarthy, the critical epistoler, who providentially had found himself a niche as the bartender at the officers club, stayed behind in their comparative sanctuary.

Who will go drive with Fergus now, and pierce the deep wood's woven shade … M's lovely battalion area reminded one of poetry. Tall trees like sycamores had been planted in vanishing rows in some serene decade, and bowers receded everywhere that M turned its eyes, dark and tranquil naves. The cuckoos sang, and in this idyllic place M seated itself in an arc on the dappled ground to hear its battalion commander, a lieutenant colonel, a light-skinned Negro with shining eyes, welcome it to its journey's end, to its 1966 home. "I know you've heard about this battalion—what've you heard?" the colonel asked, leaning forward for a reply. One hand rested tensely on his pistol holster, the other on his canteen case, not a stance to encourage a frank answer—answer wrong, and it seemed he would fire from both hips, bang! squirt! the fastest draw in the East, his idiot respondent falling over wetly dead. "Now, I know you've heard about us, out with it!" the colonel said—he was known throughout his battalion as Colonel Smoke.

How to answer him? One attentive weekend in Vietnam and M had learned: the fate of this battalion was to encounter Charlie everywhere it went, its casualty rate was something wild—it was Vietnam's jinx battalion, so word-of-mouth proclaimed. Furthermore, in that edifying weekend M's sharp ears had heard of the Operation itself: how on Monday next, its whole ill-omened battalion had orders to get on its grey-green helicopters and go into Charlie's heartland, go behind Charlie's lines, for seven days M would walk through the Michelin rubber plantation, the same inferno where a regiment of Vietnamese had been annihilated one morning when M was in basic training learning its right shoulder arms. Not surprisingly, M had become privy to the Operation even though the mimeographed order for it was marked, SECRET.

"You!" said the colonel, turning his fiery eyes on one of M's mortar men.

"I heard—sir, I heard you've had most of the action."

"You heard we got killed and wounded, didn't you? But you also heard this, didn't you? That we killed a lot of VC! And there's no battalion in Vietnam that has killed as many VC as we have! And this is our job in Vietnam, we're here to kill the VC!" M listening silently, none of its faces revealing whether the colonel's words had reassured it. "Now this battalion is good—know why? Why, because we help our buddies. We don't let buddies of ours down. I want you troops to say, if there's anywhere in the world I want to get wounded it's in this battalion. Because my buddies'll bring me in, they're not going to leave me," M not moving an eyelash. "And this isn't just on the battlefield! Even if you're on KP and you don't do it, then who has to do it? Your buddy! Suppose—if you goldbrick, if you get VD, if you get yourself sick, then who's got to do your job? Your buddy!"

Where? Sullivan asked himself, and he could almost hear the tires squealing as his psyche swerved onto the pretty detour the colonel had indicated. Where in this forest primeval could anyone get VD? peering through the bowers curiously. Already the colonel had oriented Sullivan as to his snug situation: his battalion was part of an iron circle, its radius a Herculean mile and a half, spirals of barbed wire transfixed its perimeter, trip wires abounded, Charlie, beware of mines, and mighty artillery was zeroed in, phantoms, super sabres, and freedom fighters knew the coordinates, in a sturdy sandbagged bunker Sullivan was to stand glaring at no-man's-land through a cautious slit, all the arsenal of America's genius at his fingertips, rifles, machine guns, recoilless rifles as long as the cannons, death rays, you name it, Sullivan would have it, nuclear bombs—so where were the girls? he wondered. The colonel was coming to that. He explained, in the very center of this American bastion lay a little droll Vietnamese village of thirty-two hundred souls, many of whom, most of whom, all of whom, who knows? were communists, some so dedicatedly red as to slip through the dark forests shooting American soldiers in their backs, a month ago they'd killed another lieutenant-colonel. A weird war.

"Now in this village are whores," the colonel continued. "And they're VC whores. And they've got VD a hundred percent. And you've brought fine young healthy bodies here, you'll want to take healthy bodies home to the States. You'll not want to bring filth to your wives or the girls you'll marry. And something else about whores! I said you're here to kill VC. Well, there's another reason: you're here to win the minds and hearts of the Vietnamese to the loyalty to their government. And you'll not be doing this if you're chasing whores. You'll not be doing this if your uniform's sloppy, if your shirttail's out," the colonel warming to the topic closest to his heart, the mania that he was named Smoke for, "if your button's unbuttoned. If you don't shave, if you don't cut your hair, the Vietnamese will call you just what you are: a bum, and a bum's a bum anywhere in the world, especially so in the East, and … " five minutes more in this evangelistic vein and the colonel disappeared, poof! in a flash of fire, leaving M standing in line at the adjutant's pretty tent to fill in mimeographed wills.

Nobody spoke much. It wasn't just Smoke's fire-and-brimstone speech that subdued M, it was also the sudden unearthly silence that he left behind him in this arcadian place. Sullivan stared at the leafy treetops, then at his wristwatch, thinking, I should get a new strap, this one is falling apart. Demirgian stood asking himself how long, how long would the Army's fashion consciousness abuse his patience, Demirgian playing a while with a rubber band and finally snapping it lightly on Morton's neck.

"Now where did you get that?" Morton asked him pleasantly, laughing a little, turning around. That was Morton's way—always agreeable no matter what, had Demirgian sunk a stiletto into his neck Morton's response would've been the same, "Now where did you get that," had Demirgian shot a rifle round into his spinal column, wound the sling around Morton's throat, and tugged it with might and main, be assured that Morton would have gasped politely, "All right now, enough's enough," before expiring, with a smile. Umbrage just wasn't one of Morton's humors, Morton felt no basic need to assert himself since he didn't believe there were any sides to human nature so scoundrelly as to do him harm. Probably he was blessed—definitely Morton was pleasant. A worthy friend for Prochaska, accompanying him to Times Square on their vacation and copying his courtesy in giving the little Vietnik lady her leaflets back. A few Fridays earlier, when M's compassionate first sergeant had given it its last Godspeed passes, the sergeant had refused one to Morton, telling him with melancholy basset eyes, "Son, you're not going to Texas, not on a three-day pass!" and Morton had gone complaisantly to his iron bed, where a dozen of his friends, a sergeant even, had crowded around him urging him to sign out to Philadelphia, to Rye, to anywhere and go to Texas, shh! but Morton had merely chuckled, saying it wouldn't be right. Downstairs on the dayroom's sofa, the captain, first sergeant, and operations sergeant were cudgeling their wits to intuit whether a man might really fly to Texas and back on a three-day weekend.

"We did it up in thirty-six hours," the operations sergeant was telling them, coming to the point of his unutterably stupefying story, a Mercury sedan, the tires squealing, coffee in paper cups, "and we really were hitting it!" "Mmm," said M's captain as he programmed the number thirty-six into his cerebrations. "Twenty years ago a man couldn't do that," the operations sergeant philosophized. "And ten years from now there'll be planes, they'll do it at two thousand miles an hour!"

"Wow!" said M's first sergeant, the three leaders at last putting their faith in this shrinking planet and summoning Morton downstairs in midafternoon, giving him a three day pass to Fort Worth. Arriving there in time for dinner and taking his librarian mother for an evening stroll, Morton had reported to her that he was leaving to Vietnam and to bury him in a silver coffin with a pea-green velvet lining if he should die.

"How you talk!" his mother had replied, but Morton had gone pleasantly on, never supposing that his death while a teen-ager was a prospect that he might reasonably be peeved about, as well as routinely concerned with. He said to tell the funeral parlor no shoes, but to consign him to his grave in his black one-button continental suit, a black dyed carnation in its lapel, his white ruffled formal shirt, and a black bow-tie around his neck, against which Demirgian was now snapping a rubber band two feet long.

"Oh! how you talk!" Morton's mother had said.

"Now, where did you get that?" Morton asked Demirgian.

"Where do you think I got it? From a rubber tree," Demirgian answered, indicating a trunk from out of which a putty-colored grue was rather disturbingly oozing—for that's what the "sycamores" were, rubber trees, and M's new bosky home was a rubber plantation: and the Vietnamese in the village tapped the trees, providing American automobile drivers with rubber tires and killing American lieutenant-colonels evenings.

In this and every Army battalion there are three companies, and M was in Vietnam to help bring all three to strength. After willing his $10,000 benefit to his father, Morton was sent to one company, Demirgian to another, Williams, who didn't like boa constrictors or foxhole brims, to a third—M, in whose warm plasma each of its little coagula had felt eternally cared for, M was being pulled apart like a taffy-ball by some unconcerned clerk-typist. New boys at the boarding school, girls at the "get-acquainted" dance on the lonely squeaking chairs, strangers in a strange land, M's quiet privates went to their sunless bunkers one by one. The old soldiers laughed—how they laughed, they doubled up, they tummy-clutched, they looked at M's name-tags and har-har-harred. "Hey Sullivan! You an Irishman?"

" … Yes."

"You better be with a name like Sullivan! Har har har! And your name: Demon?"

" … Demirgian."

"Virgin? Your name is Virgin? Har har har!" Above, with a noise like a loud flapping sail, a grey-green helicopter with a red cross on its breast was flying by. "Hey look! There come a few more bodies in! Har har har."

"Har har har. I guess he is really hauling one!"

"One my ass! Har har har!"

And if I laugh at any mortal thing, 'tis that I may not weep. The old-timers were not being cruel on purpose. Half a year—they'd been in Vietnam one half year, they'd walked, they'd walked, there'd be a mine, the Oklahoma private they'd given their Cration cookie to was dead, and they'd walked further: and these (of course) were the empty jungle boots that M was filling. This afternoon the old-timers had given themselves a rest, they'd been to the Vietnamese village and risen to their state of high hilarity, forgetting themselves beneath the corrugated roofs. They hadn't brought home filth—far from it, they'd brought back laundry, but they'd had Bamouiba beers at the plywood tables and they'd escaped reality by playing the cavaliers with the civilian sex: with Vietnamese girls who were whores, perhaps, with betel-black laundry ladies, with peanut, pop, and Bamouiba vendors, but mostly with the smooth-skinned Vietnamese children, who giggled and tweaked their ears, transcending thoughts of war. A source of innocent but intoxicating merriment.

"Girlsan: this beer warm. No good! Number ten!" Colloquy between the two great cultures of Vietnam is held neither in Vietnamese, as the Americans imagine, or in English, as the Vietnamese infer. The two converse in pidgin Japanese, where san is mister or miss and ichiban is number one—the best. "Girlsan: beer number ten!"

"Beer number one! You number ten!"

"And you babysan of Ho Chi Minh."

"No Ho Chi Minh! He number ten! Number one thousand! You dien cai dau," real Vietnamese meaning loco in the coco.

"Girlsan, I no dinky dow! You dinky dow … " the merry old soldiers going back to their workaday world in the early evening in that unaccustomed euphoria that M had felt so bullied by.

"Monday you come laundry?" some of the girls in the Vietnamese village had asked them.

"No. Monday we go Michelin plantation," some of the veterans had answered.

"Number one!" some of the girls had declared.

Monday morning for thirty gay minutes, for the first time in its corporate history, M could experience pleasant weather. The temperature at M's altitude was 70, and through the sides of its swift helicopters there came one of those summer-in-a-sports-car and hair rumpling breezes. With its whole silent battalion and three battalions more, M was in combat clothes and being lifted out toward the Michelin rubber plantation, a forest where the communists, all busy little beavers, had been whittling bamboo stakes for several days, dipping them in buffalo dung, urinating on them, putting them in punji pits, in foot traps, in mad little Batman traps in trees, whiz! out of bushes, pop! out of ferns—aargh! and burying mines, and hiding grenades, and step on the wires and "Look out!" grinning old Foley had told M back in its infantry training, two weeks earlier, "Look out! here it comes! five whole gallons of flaming gasoline!" Through some diabolical means, the communists at the Michelin plantation had learned of the Operation the week before, although it was classified SECRET.

M, in its pleasant helicopters, would have a few tricks itself, mainly a new black nasty-looking rifle with a bullet that was a real terror, it tumbled end over end in flight. Sunday afternoon, Demirgian's squad sergeant held one between his thumb and index finger, gazing at it long and philosophically—Hamlet, in some unwritten scene, contemplating his bare bodkin. "This … " the sergeant had soliloquized, "this but a small little old job here. But it bring nothing but death," turning it with his thumb, thinking, a real sensible bullet, thinking of the skinny blue-tick hound that his uncle in Louisiana dog-hunted with: a real sensible hound, his uncle had declared, whenever it treed a raccoon it would circle round the trunk, the coon couldn't escape. "This job," the squad sergeant had continued, "it might make two or three circles in you 'fore it comes out. Hit you in the 'tomach, liable to come out the top of you' head. Charlie now, he'll do anything he can to get this weapon. He'll risk one hundred men just to get one of these weapons."

Well. That is just peachy-keeno, Demirgian had thought, though he also caught himself thinking, Yeah? Let him just try. Demirgian's whole wild imagination had never foreseen a sergeant quite like his. The man was a Negro, short, with a chest like a sousaphone. In his teeth, which had gold veneering, with little hearts and stars of enamel flirtatiously peeking through, he was always clenching half a cigar, Demirgian had never seen his sergeant with one whole virgin cigar. Besides his drooping black moustache he had a tuft of scruffy Hassidic hair on his left cheek, keep it—it's lucky, his grandma had pleaded when he was three, and though the other kids had called him Fuzzy-face and Army officers had blanched, Demirgian's fabulous sergeant wouldn't shave it away. His real name was Gore—Sergeant Gore.

"Okay," he had told Demirgian's squad the afternoon before the Operation,

"What this is suppose' be about is getting off the 'copter. Run five meters and drop, because we don' want nobody getting hit by the 'peller. Get out and 'sperse. The first five minutes you can't hear nothing 'cept pop! pop! pop! flying over you' head. If anybody hit, just don' get panic' and jump up because then you'll get hit worser. Just yell medic. Just be cool, cool as you can, cool and calm, don' get shook up and crack up, just be cool," Sullivan biting his nails, Demirgian with eight yellow straws in his busy fingers intently weaving a place mat. "Okay, something else. Now we been talking to Colonel Smoke. He say, infantryman like a rabbit. If you catch a rabbit don' throw him in a briar patch because that's his home. So when we're in the woods, Smoke say that's our home. So we goin' take our toothpaste, we goin' take our shaving cream, shave like we do at home. Now when we come back. When we come back Smoke say to put on rank," for everyone from M was automatically a PFC. "Me, I'm goin' find myself another kind of stripes, because those yellow stripes, Charlie see those he's goin' say, I'm goin' get me a buck sergeant. But when we come back we got sewing to do. … "

… The trees became larger, the brown ground was closer, slowly M's helicopters were coming down. Even without its black rifles to carry, M had a real baggage problem: everyone wore his ammunition pouches, two canteens, a shovel to make foxholes with, a gas mask, a pack—on his pack suspenders, like boutonnieres, he had hand grenades, while each of the veterans had cigarettes or toilet tissues under a strap on his steel helmet, where they wouldn't get soggy crossing the streams. Yoshioka, by act of God an assistant machine gunner, had three incredible links of bullets pendulating from his neck to his kneecaps, he looked like Wonga the king of Tonga in his boar's-tooth beads. Demirgian had an outstanding canteen cup: he had been issued it after a week of his drinking coffee from a pan, where it sloshed around like a strange dark lunar sea, he was ignorant that it was collapsible, though, and he'd hung the cumbersome thing over his belt buckle at a mendicant angle, give to the Salvation Army. In his backpack Demirgian had a can of Old Spice Shaving Cream. Sullivan had Rise mentholated and Macleans Toothpaste. Neither of these infantrymen had Jade East or Brut. Morton had Palmolive and "Get down!" said Sergeant Gore. The helicopters took off again and Demirgian found himself lying on a patch of hard dry dirt in a flat field. He was thinking, I guess this is a rice paddy, the first he had ever observed—anyhow, it was surely no rubber plantation. Ha ha! the whole secret Operation order had been a trick, it was a subterfuge and Smoke himself hadn't been set straight till the evening before. M wasn't anywhere near the Michelin funland, in keeping with a truly secret order it was twelve merciful miles to the south, hooray for the American Army (author's note).

"Damn! Damn! Damn! I've lost a platoon," Demirgian's normally serene captain was hurrying by and muttering, but he meant that he had misplaced it, nothing dire. If truth be told, the communists were so surprised by the Operation's popping out of the floor like a Punch and Judy puppet in this unadvertised place—so taken by surprise they weren't even there, and Demirgian had nobody to shoot at—nobody did. Sunshine shone. Barn swallows darted about. Really the invasion area was quite picnicky: a big warm waffle, a lot of dried-out paddies lying in a square grid of grassy dikes, one or two feet high. Demirgian was sitting at the angle where two such dikes crossed and thinking, so … ? when do we do something? Destiny's abandoned child, he happened to be just where abscissa and ordinate intersected, where x=o and y=o and all the forces and fortunes of war canceled out to just about nothing. On all sides of Demirgian, including up, episodes of some interest seemed to be entering history's pages, but coming between them and Demirgian was a consistent half a mile of insignificant and insulating space. Half a mile beneath Demirgian, who could say? Maybe some little red imps were sticking their spears in real communists. Half a mile above him, Smoke, the Negro battalion commander, was sitting in his private helicopter and circling clockwise, looking for a lost platoon. "Goddamit," Smoke could hear Demirgian's captain say on his field radio, referring to the platoon's young lieutenant, "he got on the wrong lift!"

"That son of a bitch," Smoke replied. "He has his head up his ass and locked," turning to his left and telling his pilot, Fu Manchu, to keep on circling—well, the helicopter pilot certainly looked like Fu, his head had been shaved bald, his black moustache hung to below his chin. He was a warrant officer.

Half a mile back of Demirgian's tranquil oasis, the battalion's operations officer was sitting on a carton of C-rations and spinning the knobs of his radio to inquire about some horrifying noises that carried across the sizzling paddies from the cavalry troop half a mile to Demirgian's right. At last the officer radioed to Smoke, half a mile above Demirgian, "All that activity is recon by fire," meaning that the wags in the cavalry had ridden to some astonished Vietnamese village in their thirty-five-thousand-pound horses and were firing into it with 50-caliber machine guns, the bullets as big as hot dogs, great big Oldenburg pop-art bullets, this being the cavalry's rip-roaring way of ascertaining if any communists resided there—if so, they'd doubtless return fire. With prudence, the other Vietnamese, householders would have toddled away. Half a mile to Demirgian's left, in a village whose ten or a dozen skedaddled families had been succeeded by Morton's company, Bigalow, now wearing a black-and-white PIO on his arm, public information office, was sitting beneath a shady poncho and lunching with a girl whose camouflaged helmet wore a lovely nest of red bougainvillea blossoms. Bigalow offered her some C-rations.

"No thanks, I'm not having any," the girl replied prettily, not wishing to eat until the cool of the afternoon—the temperature was in the 100's.

"Uh … where do you live?" Bigalow asked her.

"I've a little villa in Saigon," she answered, giving Bigalow a sisterly smile. She said her name was Beverly Deepe, of the New York Herald-Tribune.

Not far away, Morton was burning down Vietnamese houses, having been asked to. "Stop burning those houses!" Smoke yelled into his radio, hitting the ceiling (the plexiglass, rather) half a mile above Demirgian's helmet. Fu was still flying him in a clockwise circle, his motionless hand on the cyclic stick, his whiskers becoming frowzy in the breeze and his thoughts going, ugh, I'll have to paste 'em down with Mexican moustache wax tonight, well, it was better than gasoline-resistant helicopter grease, which he had used for four months. "Stop burning those houses!" Smoke cried to his captains. "There's no VC in those houses!" The captains told their lieutenants, don't burn those houses if there's no VC in them—the lieutenants told their sergeants, if you burn those houses there better be VC in them—the sergeants told their men, better go burn those houses because there's VC's in them, and Morton kept striking his C-ration matches. Or something or other—anyhow, soon there wasn't a Vietnamese farmhouse that wasn't just a layer of smoldering black dust.

Bored old Demirgian was still waiting on orders. Half a mile in front of him, something extraordinary happened in Williams' company, there was a gunshot! bang! and a young boy named Higdon started to bleed. "Sergeant, I've shot myself," Higdon said to his squad leader—he was truly mortified.

"What have you did?" the sergeant cried, but Higdon, his hot pistol still in his inexperienced hand, had almost fainted.

"Dust-off! This is three-zero!" the excited operations officer cried into his radio from his C-ration carton half a mile behind Demirgian's relaxed back. "Dust-off!" meaning the red-crossed helicopter, "Dust-off, that is the location there! Over!" When the helicopter had landed noisily half a mile in front of Demirgian's very eyes, a gentle medic put Higdon on board and a correspondent for Stars and Stripes interviewed the operations officer.

"A sniper?"

"Well, a bullet."

Seconds later, thirty degrees cooler, his bleeding stanched, pale Higdon was being lifted to the field hospital, and Higdon's mimeographed form was being sped to the dusty division camp. There the facts and figures bearing on his misadventure were brought into an air-conditioned Army trailer as dark as a refrigerator room and translated into neo- Babylonian cuneiform on a white IBM card, which then was sacrificed to the only IBM accounting machine in any of this planet's combat areas, the pride of M's division. A wan custodian tapping the icy-blue START button, the IBM machine began to whirr, chewing up twenty-five casualties every ten seconds and typing a current catalog of their curricula vitae in alphabetical order on paper as wide as piano rolls. Higdon's cool little card was just two seconds from the IBM machine's teeth as whirr, the machine typed,

HICKMAN DALLAS E SGT
followed by a bleak row of code numbers whose tale was that Hickman had been slightly wounded, that he was single and lived in Ohio. Then, Higdon's card was a second away and whirr went the frigid machine, typing,

HICKMAN DALLAS E SGT
this version of Hickman's misfortune insisting that he had been killed, that he was married and lived in the hills of West Virginia. Whirr, went the IBM machine, above it a chilly little sign, "Talk about confusion! Did ya' ever have one of those crazy days when everything goes right?" Whirr, and it swallowed Higdon in one frosty bite.

HIGDON FRED S JR PFC
it typed, with a row of shivering numbers to say that Higdon was wounded in a part of his body other than his head, torso, arms, or legs (it was Higdon's foot). Then the air conditioned machine typed WHA, meaning wounded—hostile action, and even before the mighty Operation had ended, Higdon, still in his hospital, his other wrapped in white bandages, was awarded the purple heart by the direction of President Johnson.

And! And there sat Demirgian at the dead center of this campaign, the calm eye of that whirlwind, the omphalos of all events, cleaning his fingernails. If anything, Demirgian felt a bit foolish—from where he sat, every disparity between this Operation and another dull training exercise was adventitious, the principal shade of difference was it wasn't snowing. Reaching between his scratchy combat shirt and his T-shirt, Demirgian pulled out Saturday's Stars and Stripes, and sitting back against his dikes he read,

About a mile from the headquarters the MP swerved his
truck to avoid a taxi and crashed into a shop, killing a
woman and injuring two children.
Demirgian read,

"I believe it is now too late for disagreement as to whether
we should be in South Vietnam," Stennis said in a Senate
speech.
Demirgian read,

Ky is turning out to be a better premier than U.S. and
Vietnamese officials expected.
Demirgian read,

Dagwood, guess what—Pauline is going to marry Richard.
Demirgian read,

But in common decency, widder—yo' oughta mourn yore
husbin fo' at least a week!! Yo'd give a dog that courtesy!!
A roach!!
Then, into the midst of his current-events class came Sergeant Gore. "Let's move," he said, and Demirgian got to his tingling feet, telling himself, there's the Army, hurry up and wait! Demirgian moved a mile and he dug himself a foxhole—all this was Monday.

Tuesday, Demirgian lay under his rubber poncho outside of his ragged foxhole, listening to two friends gripe. "Damn," said a specialist-four, a boy whose modernistic rank was equal to corporal, "We've got to sew those stripes on once we're back."

"And," said a sergeant, "we're not allowed to sew them, we've got to stitch' them."

"What do you mean, what's the difference?"

"Well, sew is by hand. Stitch is by machine."

"What do you mean, where do we get machines?"

"We don't, that's the thing. We've got to stitch them by hand. … "

That same Tuesday, Sullivan was assigned to KP, serving a bird colonel medium rare roast beef and pouring him grapefruit juice—and that was Tuesday.

Wednesday, Demirgian walked into an ambush. No! no one in this battalion ever is ambushed, it had been shown syllogistically by Smoke! One: an ambush is unexpected— two: in this battalion we expect anything—three: it stands to reason that no one in this battalion is ambushed! Still, when one fierce communist company opened up on Demirgian with rifles, carbines, machine guns, recoilless rifles, grenades, and rifle grenades from behind some evergreen trees and people commenced bleeding and dying all about him, Demirgian was—may we say surprised? Surprised, then. Demirgian had started that day by shaving, brushing his teeth in his GI canteen water, and climbing aboard an APC: in combat, an APC being scarcely what it was in training, in the States. There it was a pill, an aspirin-phenacetin-caffeine pill, an all-purpose capsule such as the wise young medic had prescribed when Scotty had reported in for sick call with a temperature reading of 108 degrees. The medic had diagnosed Scotty's complaint as a case of holding his Winston cigarette against his thermometer in the hopes of being excused from training that wintry day, and he had laughingly given Scotty an APC, the medicinal kind. Scotty, incidentally, had never got close to combat. Thwarted in his wish to dance with Hawaii's lulu girls, he had thrown himself from an Army airplane the very morning the Operation had begun, Scotty having gone to Georgia to become a paratrooper instead of a straight-leg soldier in the Far East.

No, an APC wasn't a pill but an armored personnel carrier, a crazy tank-like truck that the cavalry used to carry infantrymen over the paddies. Demirgian's idle platoon, six of it from M, had been attached to the cavalry this Wednesday morning, and standing in these fabulous steel Conestoga wagons it had driven east to a jungle that the playful cavalrymen knew as Sherwood forest, the same evergreen woodland where Charlie's rifle company lay in ambush, as dumb coincidence would have it. The temperature was in the 100's and clouds were few, the water on some of the paddies daintily reflecting them, a Fragonard effect. Once when their APC's passed by some yellow Vietnamese houses where a sniper or two mightn't inconceivably lurk, the prudent cavalrymen paused and burned the pathetic little hamlet down, an act that any American whose heart goes out to the homeless will censure with a vehemence that is proportional to his range from the houses in question. Demirgian joined in with gusto, throwing his hand grenades into the thatch. Far from seeing this as senseless, Demirgian's inevitable GI point of view was, finally! finally he could do something with a clear bearing on America's war effort, clear in a physical sense if hazy around the edges in the sense of grand strategy. Demirgian might now be a wolf on the fold, but a mickey-mouser, that he joyfully wasn't. His patriotic duties done, Demirgian read a copy of Stars and Stripes as the APC rolled on. His chariot had a steel skin and black rubber tractor treads as tough as an old bull elephant's foot, yellow straw stuck in the tiny cracks. Its scowling driver sat amid steel and watched the paddies through a guess what? periscope, and a brawny cavalry sergeant with a talcum of brown dust on his cheeks stood at that Oldenburg machine gun, two burly hands on its wooden handles, thumbs on its trigger. Coming near Sherwood forest, the cavalrymen told Demirgian to walk ahead with his black rifle to protect the APC.

Walking with his platoon toward the opaque forest, the APC's snug as a bug in a rug behind him, Demirgian was reminded of the poem by Robert Frost, Two roads diverged in a wood, and I—I took the one less traveled by, good infantry tactics, that. Credit a white puppy with saving Demirgian's life. Frightened by this rowdy cavalry column, it ran from behind a haystack and along the evergreens, hippity-hop on its spindly legs, the sergeant who didn't look forward to stitching shouting, "Hey! Look at that damn dog!" and Demirgian's whole teen-aged platoon opening fire, everything it had. Bang, in a leg, then leaping, landing, stumbling along on its other three, with a bang bang bang the doggie died. Having all been reared in poor Asian villages where to waste meant to want, the communist troops in the underbrush could not conceive of a land so lavishly endowed that it had treasure to spare against man's best friend. Assuming this mighty barrage was meant for themselves, the communists began to return fire before Demirgian had walked over the last little paddy-dike into their killing zone. When the bullets started coming at him with their slapping sounds, Demirgian was—surprised. No such thing had happened to him before. Oh, the Arab boys in Lebanon had thrown stones and dirty Doug in his shop mathematics class had missed Demirgian with an iron chair, he was in fistfights sometimes but rifles? machine guns? slap? slap? slap? never. Demirgian had never seen honest-to-God communists until now—in fact he still didn't, peer as he might into the dense woods, the source of this infernal racket. "Get your ass down" the stitching sergeant screamed and Sullivan, lying behind the dike and thinking, not at all frenziedly, will I see Pam again? or Debbie, for that matter, thinking detachedly and tugging on Demirgian's gas-mask bag insistently tried to bring Demirgian to earth, but sturdy Demirgian kept standing there amid the slap! the horsewhip sounds like Washington crossing the Delaware, curious and desirous to see some flesh in that jungle to fire his black rifle at. Some soldiers Demirgian knew seemed to be dead already: a medic was dead, another friend was mortally wounded, neither had been in M company. The cavalry lieutenant was lying down, a bullet that the ghostly communists had aimed at his chest having struck his Star of David with the force of a battering-ram, a novel intercession. Another of those enemy poltergeists sent a bullet through a sergeant's helmet with an ear-shattering ping-g, in here, out there, the helmet ripping apart like a wet paper bag, the bullet missing the sergeant's head, strangely enough.

Slap! Slap! Slap! like a violent bit of applause or a vicious swipe at an insect. Demirgian aside, M was lying on its stomachs back of the knee-high dikes: out of the fire and into the frying pan, as it were. But here in M's grassy asylum, the celebrated effects of a baptism of fire, a cold sweat, a heart like a kettledrum, an unreliable sphincter, a shrinking-in of the nerves like a jellyfish pulling up its tentacles—the legendary symptoms were all surprisingly mild. The truth is that M had never had quite the imagination to conceive of itself as dead, a deficit of imagery that one more month in Vietnam was to partially redress. Demirgian's surplus of imagination came to the same thing, and amid these dangerous slapping sounds it carried him beyond fears of dying to fantasies of wondrously surviving. Paying no heed to the stitching sergeant's lonely cries of "Get your ass down," Demirgian's stubborn inquisitiveness now turned to his right to the mystifying clouds of purple which came out of his fatherly platoon sergeant. By chance, a bullet hitting that old sergeant's shoulder had also ignited a purple signal flare on his suspenders, and while Demirgian's platoon sergeant was taking off these flashy suspenders, slap! another bullet went through his heart and he died. A soldier crawled to him crying, "Hey! Doc!" but that soldier was shot as well. By then Demirgian had learned how valor and discretion needn't be incompatible and he had gotten down behind his dike, a good soldier obeying orders who still hadn't seen a communist. From time to time he raised himself to peer or to fire his rifle with a hopeful bang! into the forest—at what, Demirgian kneweth not.

In this way, Demirgian came to appreciate the eerie nature of his generation's war. On many, most of the veterans in Vietnam, one will discern an uneasy flitting of the eyes or an irresolute twitch at the corners of the mouth, it testifies how they've been a year in the field boxing shadows, taking up arms against a sea of unseen essences, locked in mortal combat with an insubstantial Kafkan vapor—that battle to the death, an act whose only redeeming virtue had been to make ordinary Roman men into heroes, now makes men bewildered little Wozzecks instead. When silver airplanes started to divebomb the trees, Demirgian could only lie behind his dike observing a colony of black termites eating a grey beetle. Taking his insect repellent from his pants pocket, Demirgian directed a fine needle spray at one of these conspicuous enemies of man, a termite who stopped in the midst of its verminous meal to look at Demirgian bug-eyed. Its shower bath continuing the termite turned and fled to Demirgian's right, oblivious of the super sabre jets that now dove in from there to drop their bombs with a spherical boom on the terrified evergreen trees. You dumb bunny, Demirgian said to his termite, you're trying to get away from the stuff and it's all over you, the dizzy little pismire at last giving way to panic and falling over a precipice two inches high, out of its misery. Boom! As the silver bombers kept giving the vegetable kingdom a ruthless beating, a curious grey-green caterpillar happened along, and Demirgian squashed it with a brown twig while he said to that aborted butterfly, Well—survival of the fittest and you're not fit. Boom! Boom! Boom! Well behind Demirgian, a Vietnamese in black pajamas emerged from a haystack running in panic to Demirgian's left, his arms in the skies signaling, I surrender, and when an enraged cavalryman with a steel machete tried to wreak his vengeance on this anthropomorphous raw material a more self-collected boy rescued him. Taken prisoner, the Vietnamese was found to be nothing more nefarious than a scared farmer of sixty-four reverend years. His name is Nguyen Van Mang.

By now Charlie's spooky rifle company had spirited itself away, the first mellow boom of the dive bombers apparently being the cock's crow. Demirgian's unique Negro sergeant rose to his feet saying, "Let's get back to the 'PC," and from then on Wednesday had no worse sounds to offer M than a single hoarse but hyperbolical scream, I'm wounded! It arose from a boy whose neolithic jaw, a counterweight for some unseen bascule bridge, had kept his mouth irremediably open as he raced to the APC and tripped over a paddy-dike, biting his lip.

"Is it bleeding?" he cried as M rode bumpily and blissfully back to its foxholes, Sullivan eating a C-ration fruit cake, Demirgian doing the puzzle page in the Junction City Union. "Nya-a!" showing them his uninteresting wound.

That night in their welcome holes, the hard-bitten veterans of M company, hale and moderately hearty and happy at how little scared they'd been, listened to their transistor radios as the armed forces station made its very first mention of the Operation: contact had been sporadic and US casualties light, the station said. And then the DJ played jazz—and that was Wednesday.

Thursday, Williams, the gentle Florida periscope operator, achieved immortality of sorts: he really saw a communist, large as life and twice as spunky, an experience that no other trooper in M's alert battalion was to enjoy throughout this Operation. This special communist was staring at Williams from a bush no farther than the other side of a pingpong table, staring at him down the grey barrel of a rifle, in fact. "Ho!" Williams shouted in consternation: but to begin at the beginning.

On Thursday, Demirgian's deserving platoon had given itself a siesta as Williams' company and Morton's company walked through the dark jungle of Sherwood forest, slow going, all sorts of tangly things, little red ants, their mission being to destroy Charlie's source of strength: the communist stores of rice. Every time Williams' snail paced friends came to one in the underbrush they burned it—two or three tons of this brown, riverlike stuff could keep Charlie's battalion marching on its stomach a week, the idea being. A gay little Vietnamese soldier was along to sanction any or all burnings or blowings up, first having satisfied himself that the rice in each cache was truly communist, the soldier having been trained in this mystic art. Once as their machetes cut through the vegetation, Williams' slow-gaited friends came to a stock of Vermont like maple candy in laundry-soap sized bars. But being in a cave it just wouldn't burn. An inventive sergeant began to throw the sugary stuff to the ants—but no, too, time consuming. Hand grenades? Now he had maple sugar with holes. Nausea-inducing gas? Nothing doing, it might be against the Geneva convention. At last the patient sergeant radioed the Army engineers, who blew up the maple candy with TNT. Bigalow was on this safari in his flack capacity, a story! he told himself, but he guessed that he couldn't write it, a public-information sergeant having told him no such predatory doings would pass Army censorship. "You're not going to win friends among Vietnamese farmers," Bigalow's sergeant had explained.

Even with machetes, moving through this jungle was like searching a big attic closet on a summer morning, old moist bathrobes drawing across one's face and rusty clothes hangers snagging in one's hair, corrugated cardboard beneath one's feet. Furthermore, in this wildwood there were snipers around shooting at people, a rustling in the leaves and a slap! But what really bedeviled Williams' and Morton's companies as they pushed along weren't their human enemies but ants, little red ants which hadn't seen juicy Westerners in a quarter century, even the French army hadn't dared go to this treacherous place. Morton would tell himself, Oh—! here comes another one, as still another cackling ant threw itself out of the foliage onto his neck, and Morton would roll it off with sweating fingers, his black rifle in his other hand, pressing it to instant death. Morton would feel guilty about his extraordinary acts of self-assertiveness; a Baptist, he didn't think God set anything on this earth without having His reason, maybe in little red ants there was a liquid to cure malaria, cancer, doctors would find it some day, Morton piously believed. At night he would justify his steady slaughter by telling himself, it shouldn't make any difference—there were so many of them. He would remonstrate with Russo, the sixteen-year-old desperado who swore that if he had been in those insect infested woods that day (he hadn't, he had fainted from the heat)—that he would cry, "Die!" to every ant he butchered, laughing like Mephistopheles. Morton would smile at Russo tolerantly, saying that all God's ants should be killed with kindness.

Bigalow—now Bigalow was a soldier first, a PIO reporter second, and squeezing his ants between his thumb and index finger he mechanically cast their lifeless bodies to the jungle floor. But as Bigalow inched along he also speculated whether there mightn't be a story in them, How to Kill Ants, by PFC Vaughan A. Bigalow. He thought, One way is to throttle your ant by pushing a grain of sand into its throat with a toothpick. A second way … a microscopic punji pit, a careless ant expiring horribly on the point of a pin. In practice Bigalow killed his ants conventionally: indifferently, paying no mind to their dying agonies while he walked along with the friend who once had twitted him about his ball-point pen, I stabbed! I stabbed! I stabbed! "Bigalow," the boy remembered in this incongruous place, "tell Dubitsky he owes me five dollars."

"All right," said Bigalow, slapping a neck-ant.

"And Bigalow. You've got a pair of my khakis."

"You're right," said Bigalow, dropping his dead ant down.

"And Bigalow? If the captain doesn't get us out of here, you can have the other pair, too."

But Williams—! It never occurred to Williams' gentle mind to kill these ants: if one of them bit he just brushed it off without taking his grim revenge. And such was Williams' nonbelligerent temper when he had that sudden brush with his Communist, a Vietnamese with a white shirt and hair—black hair, Williams would never forget his bushy hair. Resting in a little jungle hole, a gully, hearing a twig crack, turning around, Williams saw this black-haired intruder and shouted, "Ho," ducking instinctively into his hole. A bullet burned across his shoulder blade and Williams cried out, "Oh," burying his startled face in the dirt, holding his black rifle high above him like an African's spear, shooting it at the trees one-handed, bang! bang! bang! and crying, "Sergeant! sergeant! sergeant! come here!" My kingdom for a periscope!

"What's the matter?" Williams' sergeant called and he hurried to this clamorous scene.

"Keep shooting!" Williams shouted, doing exactly that, his face still plowing into the dirt. "I seed one!"

"Where?"

"Out there! He shot me," jerking his head up, spying the evergreen trees but no more black-haired communist.

"Whereabouts?"

"Here—in the shoulder!"

"Nothing. Maybe a ricochet breezed across it."

"Sergeant, that was no ricochet! I'm hit, I know I'm hit!"

"Rock steady!" said Williams' unruffled sergeant. "You aren't hit, you've nothing to worry about, you're okay. Rock steady."

Williams got dazedly to his feet and stared around. He told his sergeant, "Okay, I'll try."

"Can you make it through the jungle?"

"I'll try."

But as Williams resumed his death march through the tangled vines, the tendrils plucking at his shoulders, pulling at his feet, he feared to see that black-haired man staring at him from every bush, he imagined the vines to be black hair, black hair to be condensing from the shadowy air. Red ants fell on Williams' sleeve, and Williams dully brushed them off, I get through this I'm never going back—never!

His black-haired nemesis or someone else was shooting Americans all their arduous way through the forest, slap! and slap! killing two of them, wounding many. Coming to the bright paddies at last, Williams' friends were plenty mad at the communists—believe it! Taking their wild revenge, the irrepressible privates went through a yellow Vietnamese village like Visigoths, like Sherman's army, burning the houses, ripping the clothes, breaking the jars, the rice running out on the muddy floor, "I won't leave this to the goddam gooks!" One private shot himself a dog; when a sergeant yelled, "You're a real good goddam soldier" he only laughed. Somebody lit a lighter, "The lieutenant doesn't want you to," "F--- the lieutenant," the house was in black tongued flames. Somebody used a grenade launcher, there was nothing left.

The following calm morning, Williams went along the foxholes to talk to his sergeant, a young-looking boy from the East. "Now, I don't want you to think I'm a comprehentious objector," Williams began, his sergeant taking him quietly aside.

"Do you mean a com—conscientious objective?"

"I don't want you to think I'm one of those. I'll do anything you want me to: except'n to kill somebody."

"Well," said Williams' sergeant gently. "Don't you think you're giving up too easy?"

"No, Serge, I've tried, I've tried, I've made up my mind. I haven't got it in me to kill, I found that yesterday."

"Well, there ain't none of us wants to kill someone. But if it's something that's got to be done, somebody's got to do it, that's all."

"Serge, I'm just no use in the jungle unless'n I can kill someone. I just ain't going back in the jungle—I just ain't going back."

"Well, somebody got to go back in that jungle, Charlie ain't coming out," Williams' patient sergeant concluded.

In the weeks after that at M's sylvan rubber plantation, the soft light slipping through the tall trees, the birds in the leaves, a monkey—the weeks after that, Williams' sergeant made sweet remonstrances, Williams' first sergeant made terrible threats, a court martial, six years at hard labor, a dishonorable discharge, but neither the stick nor carrot could change Williams' simple belief, kill or be killed was the law of that jungle and he wanted neither of them. "The spunkless wonder" his bitter lieutenant called him at dinner in the officers tent, thinking, he's selfish, he's unpatriotic, he says that he's scared—well, so everyone is scared, there's a war on, but Williams won't do his part! The lieutenant could tolerate this in the Vietnamese, but Williams—he was an American!

An ambulance having been called for, Williams was taken to the rubber plantation's bright landing strip. Then a red-crossed helicopter and a second Army ambulance took him to the dusty, insufferably hot little tent where his division's psychiatrist sat, engrossedly patting a handkerchief on his sweat-soaked arms and elaborately folding it into quarters and sixteenths prior to his sliding it into his pants pocket. "Well, Williams? What's your problem?" the psychiatrist began. He was a redheaded captain.

"I don't want no part of this killing people," Williams replied.

"How did this come about?" Distantly the psychiatrist was thinking, autism— association—ambivalence—affect, the four signs of schizophrenia they had taught him at Colorado. One of those telltale a's—well, we're none of us perfect. Two of them, uh-oh, three of them, zap! a medical discharge for poor old psychotic Williams.

Williams sat in a chair by the doctor's little desk, the same catty-corner furniture arrangement at which he had once sought work at the VC, the Virginia Carolina Mining Corporation, $1.97 an hour. All that Williams knew of psychiatrists he had acquired on television: he believed that his redheaded doctor would give him some bright-colored blocks to put together in two minutes, schizophrenia he hadn't heard of, three of those a's would be gibberish to Williams, association might mean the Knights of Pythias or the NAACP, neither of which he had joined. In all innocence he sat in that sweltering tent and answered the doctor's friendly questions. Williams' father had drowned. He had had headaches for a month after. He lived with his mother, but he had a girl. Kathernell was her name. He wanted to marry her, and someday he would.

Ten minutes later the doctor wrote "No illness found" on Williams' mimeographed form and sent Williams back to his rifle company, where the captain made him a cook instead of a combat soldier and where he learned to mix water, flour, lard, and dark brown gravy base to make gravy.

But back to Friday of the Operation.

Friday the long awaited happened—M's battalion killed somebody, at last. "What's the spirit of the bayonet?" wild-eyed sergeants had cried to M in training, in America. "To kill!" M had learned to shout fiercely back. "The enemy is dedicated—he won't scare away," old Smoke, its battalion commander, had said to M, eyes aflame. "You've got to kill him." And on Friday morning M inevitably killed, doing its climactic job with mixed feelings, one understands, some of its soldiers queasy in the presence of waxy death, some of them impassive. M had guessed it would be this way—in training camp, Hofelder would think of a communist running at him savagely, he had asked himself, could I really kill him? but a buddy of Hofelder's had simply laughed, saying, "Shucks. I'm me and he's he," meaning that if I kill a fellow that is his worry, not mine. The episode was again the doing of Demirgian's platoon, again it had climbed on those hot APC's and had driven bump—bounce—bump to Sherwood forest and beyond, burning more yellow houses as it went. In actual fact, the cavalry's big lieutenant-colonel had given his captains the order, insure that positive identification be made: a sniper in the house destroy it, otherwise spare it. But through the iteration of imperatives and abolition of qualifiers and a wise apprehension that the colonel couldn't be serious, his order had been almost unrecognizable when it got through channels to Demirgian's Sergeant Gore. Gore had heard the order as, "Kill everything. Destroy everything. Kill the cows, the pigs, the chickens—everything."

"Well, sir. You can't destroy everything," Gore had told the glum second lieutenant who relayed this.

"That's what the cavalry said," the lieutenant had answered unenthusiastically.

"Sir, I won't kill the women and children," Gore had told him.

But as their APC's rolled by the doomed villages, there were no women or children to be seen, men neither—they'd fled. The burly cavalrymen and Demirgian's platoon had been traveling since seven—weird, Sullivan thought as the morning got hotter, observing that his steel vehicle was always in sunshine, never in shade, although there were scores of small white sheep-clouds in the blue above him: a Vietnamese weather mystery. But the wonder of wonders was Demirgian. An unaccustomed competence seemed to have stolen across Demirgian's appearance: his eyes level, his rifle at a steady angle of attack, he even reminded one of that paragon of infantrymen that had been painted like a rampant lion on each of their training camp's objets d'art, even on the insides of teacups at the officers mess. Wednesday had satisfied Demirgian's romantic heart, it had confirmed Demirgian's faith: if he didn't stand in lines but stayed in cavalry columns, if he didn't shoulder a rifle to salute with but to shoot with, ah! then the American Army needn't be closed to life's grander moments. Getting into the spirit of his fierce orders, Demirgian shot at a water buffalo and heartily fired tracers into the yellow haystacks to kindle them. Newman, M's old philosophical alligator stalker, climbed from his APC to ignite one yellow farmhouse, but since he had seen distant women and children running from it one minute before, Newman had serious doubts about his task. He said to his sergeant, "Now, why do this? They'll just build another tomorrow," but really Newman was thinking, I burn their house, that'll just make them communists, won't it? Smoke himself had asserted so. Still, Newman obeyed his orders, using his Army matches, closing the cover before striking them, the cover inscribed, "Where liberty is, there is my home—Benjamin Franklin," the apocalypse drove on.

Then it was that the incident happened. A cavalryman, seeing a sort of bunker place, a hut above, hole below, and hearing some voices inside it, told Demirgian to throw a grenade in. Dermirgian hesitating, -----, a soldier we have met before, though not by name, jumped from his APC and flipped in a hand grenade himself. It rolled through the door hitting a sort of earthen baffle before it exploded, and ----- gasped as ten or a dozen women and children came shrieking out in their crinkled pajamas: no blood, no apparent injuries, though, and ----- got onto his carrier again, it continued on. The next APC in the column, with Yoshioka aboard, drove up to this hovel, and a Negro specialist four, his black rifle in his hands, warily extended his head in, peering through the darkness one or two seconds before he cried, "Oh my god!"

"What's the matter," said a second specialist, a boy on whose machine gun Yoshioka was assistant.

"They hit a little girl" and in his muscular black arms the first specialist carried out a seven-year-old, long black hair and little earrings, staring eyes—eyes, her eyes are what froze themselves onto M's memory, it seemed there was no white to those eyes, nothing but black ellipses like black goldfish. The child's nose was bleeding—there was a hole in the back of her skull.

"Sir," said a cavalry sergeant, his thumb on the press-to-talk switch of his olive drab radio, his captain on the line, "Sir, there's a little girl, a civilian girl, who is wounded. Can we have a dust-off?" The sergeant hoped for a helicopter to bring the gazing child to one of Vietnam's cluttered civilian hospitals, where the patients lie three to a bed with weird afflictions like missing arms and legs and holes in parts of their bodies. "Roger," said the cavalry captain, but then the seven-year-old shuddered and died. "Sir," said the cavalry sergeant, "the little girl died."

"Roger," said the captain and the APC's moved on, pausing only for Yoshioka's machine gunner to give the other children chewing gum and to comfort the girl's mother as best he could, "We're sorry," the mother shaking her head embarrassedly as though to say please—it could happen to anyone, a piece of shrapnel sticking out of her shoulder; the medic gave her a bandage before he left.

One doesn't doubt, in the many months to come M would see operations with a greater share of glory (and it would see many, the Army would need fifteen hundred operations as vast as this to cover all Charlie's territory, and Charlie might still be back the following evening)—more glorious operations, but this first Operation of M's had come to its melancholy close, and M's tired battalion was to kill, wound, or capture no other Vietnamese, communist or otherwise, estimated or actual, in the day-and-a-half remaining. Most of M was truly ashamed about the seven-year-old. A cavalry lieutenant had no misgivings, telling himself, these people don't want us here anyhow, why should I care about them?, a thought that he bitterly volunteered in conversation. In his innocent past, the lieutenant had gone through the empty-looking yellow Vietnamese villages without taking care to destroy them first, a man, a woman, a boy opening fire on him, killing one or two Americans, men for whose lives he was responsible. Vietnam had shown to the lieutenant's satisfaction the line where compassion must end, caution begin.

Yoshioka had stood by the bunker watching the girl die. He felt no special affinity toward Asia's troubles, though he was Oriental and his mother had been at Hiroshima, but being an American he did like children—he turned away, his face waxily paralyzed. Life hadn't taught him to phrase his thoughts with any great felicity, and Yoshioka simply told himself his favorite vivid word and promised himself to think of other things. But that he couldn't do, for three Fridays later, jumping from a dusty Army truck, seeing a glistening wire between two bushes, declaring, quite phlegmatically, "There's a mine," a sergeant reaching his hand out to keep soldiers back, reaching his hand out, reaching his hand, reaching—three Fridays later in the black explosion Yoshioka was freakishly wounded the same way as that staring child. The sergeant who touched the trip wire was killed, the Negro who'd found the little girl was killed, M's old alligator hunter was pierced by the whistling pieces of steel and evacuated, and "Yokasoka's dead," soldiers were saying that night at their rubber plantation, still not getting his name right, not knowing how Yoshioka lay in a Saigon hospital marginally alive, huge Frankenstein stitches on his shaven head, his acne caked with blood, a hole in his throat to breathe through, bubbles between his lips, the soles of his feet a queer pale yellow, his head thrashing right and left as though to cry no-no-no, his hand slapping his thigh as though he'd heard some madcap story, a sheet around the bed frame to hold him in—a jar of clear liquid dripping into him, a brownish-yellow liquid dripping out, a PFC shooing the flies away and sucking things out of his throat hole with a vacuum machine, a modest Navajo nurse pulling the sheet up over his legs, a doctor leaning over him whispering, "Bob? You're in a hospital. You're going to be on your litter a while. You're going to be traveling some. First you'll be on a plane. … "

It chanced that the bed next to Yoshioka's was a crib, inside it a stuffed red-polkadot puppy and a wide-eyed Vietnamese girl of two. Tiny white plaster casts like dinner candles kept her from picking her moist upper lip, where Yoshioka's gentle and good Samaritan doctor had operated to correct a cleft, an ugly defect since her birth.

Saturday, the last scheduled day of the Operation and the fiftieth since the day when Milett had told M, "I've got a wife, three kids at home," Saturday, M had nothing to do but push little squares of cotton through its rifle barrels. Demirgian said, "I cleaned it yesterday," and with a specialist-four he sat cross-legged on the grass by his foxhole doing the crossword puzzle in Stars and Stripes, his curved back to the communists, if any. "Appellation of Athena. That's a good one," Demirgian murmured.

"Room in a harem," the specialist countered softly.

"Ten down?" Demirgian.

"Nine down," the specialist.

"Ten down is girl's name is Ann."

"Nine down."

"Nine down is room in a harem."

"Like a bedroom?

"Nine down is what?" Demirgian asked the elements.

Sullivan sat reading The Unanswered Questions About President Kennedy's Assassination. Russo was lying down: his beloved bowie knife had vanished in the woods like Excalibur in the lake, Russo had heat exhaustion besides, and under a coconut tree he whispered to his friends his secret age, hoping they might betray him to the authorities. Morton sat in his foxhole and ate his C-rations, pleasantly asking his friends about why they burned Vietnamese houses—he felt funny about it. Friday morning Morton had asked a squad leader, "Sergeant, should I burn this house?" "Here, this'll help it," the sergeant had answered, giving him a jar of kerosene from the kitchen shelf. All right: an order's an order, Morton had accepted that, but then the sergeant had said, "That's enough," and Morton's disobedient friends had lazily stayed behind, burning the whole village to a tiny replica of Lidice—now, Morton was good-naturedly wondering why. His friends, all of them old-timers in Vietnam, guaranteed to Morton that he would be less studious of the sensitivities of Vietnamese after a few experiences of their trying to kill him. One of his friends said, "All these people, the VC come and take their brothers and fathers away, so if they've got family in the VC of course they'll be VC sympathizers." Another friend said, "Look at it this way. You burn their house, if they're not a VC now they'll be one later," by which he meant go ahead and burn it, a tight little circle of reasoning that made even Morton blink. A third of his friends said simply, "I burn because I hate. I hate Vietnam. I hate it because I'm here. I hate every house, every tree, every pile of straw and when I see it I want to burn it." He seemed surprised to learn that the rest of Morton's friends had intellectual reasons, as well.

"Well," said Morton, laughing, "I guess in a few months I'll be burning houses too!" But that wasn't to happen. Because two weeks later, walking down a dusty road, there was a noise and Morton died, killed by one of Charlie's mines, his legs in the dirt at raggedy-ann angles, he seemed to have three or four legs. "We held divine memorial services in his honor," the Chaplain wrote to Morton's mother and father in Texas. "Many were the generous tears as we reflected upon this profound truth,


Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.
It may," the Chaplain wrote in his standard letter, "also be of comfort for you to remember that Billy was serving in a noble cause, helping good people to live in freedom here and all over the world. You remain in my prayers," the Chaplain wrote to Morton's parents, who buried him in his one-button suit.

"Site of the Taj Mahal," the specialist-four was saying.

"India! India!" Demirgian cried.

"Too many letters," the specialist told him. Once they were through with the puzzle, they turned to the news and discovered a story on the Operation, several days old, on the front page.

"Gee," Demirgian said, "I didn't think they'd write so much about this."

"The division," the specialist said, reading out loud, "was in the midst of its biggest campaign of the Vietnam war, hey I didn't know that, after pouring thousands of troops into a rugged wooded area … "

"Wooded!" Sullivan looked up and cried.

"The battle-hardened division … " "Battle-hardened! Ha!"

" … relying heavily on the element of surprise to catch a huge Vietcong force believed to be holing up in the district, launched its drive with lightning speed at daybreak Monday morning. Troops and tanks, along with armed personnel carriers, have swept into the area to close off the entire circle. Another force of troops is sweeping through the woods to the east. …"

"Caught in the crossfire!" Sullivan cried, and M's merriment continued until a sergeant with three stripes above, two rockers below, striding up to this defense perimeter, told Demirgian's platoon to quit goofing and to police up the area around its foxholes. Out into no-man's-land Demirgian walked, telling himself that the Army is the Army is the Army … but thinking it with a newfound equanimity and getting himself an old C-ration peanut-butter lid, a C-ration chicken-and-noodles can, and an empty carton of Marlboro cigarettes that had been brutally ripped open, and some months later Demirgian was—

Some months later, Sullivan was on orders to Saigon, by grace of God a guard in this American brothel. McCarthy was at the dusty division camp mixing dry martinis, and Williams was making gravy on the rubber plantation, wondering, why doesn't Kathernell write? Newman was still in the field hospital hunting his notional alligators. A convert to candor, Russo was in Yonkers with an honorable discharge, a marshal in the Memorial Day Parade, and Bigalow was Alabama-bound to learn to fly helicopters, $298.20. Prochaska was on the Riviera on three weeks' leave. Yoshioka was in California dazedly alive, and Morton was in Texas dead and buried, but Demirgian—Demirgian was still in his fighting squad, the general called it best in battalion, Demirgian was in for specialist four and likely he would make sergeant in 1966. While he still had seen no communists, neither had he met a Vietnamese who cared a fig about communists or a feather about his fighting them. On operations, Demirgian swung through the jungle on Tarzan vines, he gazed at the high yellow flames, he found the American Army good. Without any qualms he told himself, I'd like to burn the whole country down and start again with Americans. One fourth of Demirgian's tour of duty was safely over and done.
